Anchor found next to Balticconnector belongs to Newnew Polar Bear | News | ERR
{{noticeUi.heading[langCode]}}
{{infoLink[langCode].label}}
{{noticeUi.allowAllLabel[langCode]}}
{{rewokeLabels[langCode]}}
X !
News
ERR News
{{1699617420000 | amCalendar}}
share Facebook X (Twitter) e-mail
The anchor raised from the seabed. Source: Soome keskkriminaalpolitsei
News
Technical examinations confirmed the suspicion that the anchor found next to the Balticconnector gas pipeline last month belongs to the Chinese vessel Newnew Polar Bear, the Finnish authorities said on Friday.
"At this stage we can state that the anchor lifted from the sea on October 24, 2023, may for some technical details be considered to belong to Newnew Polar Bear. On the said anchor, the same type of paint has also been detected as in the damaged gas pipeline," Detective Superintendent Risto Lohi said , from the National Bureau of Investigation said in a statement.
Based on the data collected, the main line of investigation into the sequence of events has remained unchanged. The focus is still on clearing up the role of the vessel Newnew Polar Bear.
"We have contacted Chinese authorities and made an international request for legal assistance in order to obtain information and enhance cooperation in clearing up the case," Lohi added.
Damage to the Balticconnector pipeline. Source: Finnish Border Guard The agency said, that although the "investigation has progressed well", it is still expected to last for a long time due to the related technical examinations and international requests.
The Balticconnector pipeline between Finland and Estonia experienced a sudden drop in pressure on October 8, which turned out to be leak.
The authorities believe the damage to the pipeline was likely caused by the anchor, but it is not yet known if it was deliberate or intentional.
Two communication cables between Estonia and Finland and Estonia and Sweden were also damaged.
Follow ERR News on Facebook and Twitter and never miss an update!
Editor:
Helen Wright
balticconnector newnew polar bear
Message ERR News
Related
Captain of ship that destroyed Balticconnector pipeline appears in Hong Kong court
China admits container ship Newnew Polar Bear damaged undersea gas pipeline
Balticconnector gas pipeline should return to service April 22
Estonia, Finland to increase Balticconnector's capacity during repairs
JEF sending ships to increase protection of Baltic Sea undersea infrastructure
Anchor that broke pipeline and cables could have been dragged for hundreds of kilometers
Putin press secretary: Kremlin has no info on communications cable damage
Russian communications cable also damaged in Gulf of Finland last month
Estonia releases first photo of damaged communications cable
Photo: Chinese ship that crossed gas pipeline is missing anchor
Estonia, Finland hope to cooperate with China during pipeline investigation
Cable between Estonia, Sweden damaged by 'external force or tampering'
news in simple estonian
LIVE
Lihtsad uudised 18. septembril
european day of languages quiz
LIVE
Moomin stories in different languages to feature in European Day of Languages
listen: radio tallinn
LIVE
watch: jupiter
LIVE
About us
ERR News is the English-language service of Estonian Public Broadcasting, run by a fully independent editorial team.
To read up on ERR News' comments rules and to contact ERR's other services, please follow the link below.
Staff, contacts & comments
Latest news
12:12
Estonian scientists to solve practical problems of over 180 companies
12:03
Tallinn to turn vacant land by Linnahall into tucked-away recreation area
11:29
Japanese ballet pro, Turkish tech CEO make Estonia home
10:58
Tartu court convicts fulling station chain Olerex, owner in false data case
10:31
Government's economic growth advisory body wraps up
10:00
Experts' proposals: Estonia's regional policy needs a reboot
09:46
Minister: Estonia's threat assessment unchanged after Denmark report
09:23
Reform Party and Parempoolsed head up in the polls
09:12
From tarantulas to a stork nest fire, Tallinn rescuers come to animals' aid
08:40
Interior Ministry now publishes deceased people's personal data online
be prepared!
Ole valmis! ' crisis preparedness app" href="//news.err.ee/1609637290/be-prepared-download-the-ole-valmis-crisis-preparedness-app"> LIVE
Download the ' Ole valmis! ' crisis preparedness app
LIVE
Reminder: How to act when Estonia's EE‑ALARM public warning alert is issued
LIVE
Where can I find crisis information for Estonia?
Most Read articles
23.09
Magnitude 1.4 quake shakes northwestern Estonia
24.09
Tallinn school asks ministry for €400,000 in emergency funds to finish out the year
24.09
Baltic states ask EU for €500 million in additional support for drone defense
23.09
Swedish prisoners complaining of conditions in Tartu prison
24.09
Estonia imposes own sanctions on delisted Russian oligarch pair
24.09
Investor: Baltic defense forces cool on domestic drones
24.09
Pärnu man shot dead by police after pointing 'gun' at officer
24.09
Rail Baltica delays leave local communities disappointed
24.09
Housing prices rise 6% on year as market rebounds
24.09
Trans activists accuse state gender committee of bias and obstruction
public broadcasters launch news portal
LIVE
European public broadcasters launch joint trusted news portal
useful information
LIVE
Commenting on ERR News articles
Top
Hea lugeja, näeme et kasutate vanemat brauseri versiooni või vähelevinud brauserit.
Parema ja terviklikuma kasutajakogemuse tagamiseks soovitame alla laadida uusim versioon mõnest meie toetatud brauserist:
x Sulge