China admits container ship Newnew Polar Bear damaged undersea gas pipeline | News | ERR
{{noticeUi.heading[langCode]}}
{{infoLink[langCode].label}}
{{noticeUi.allowAllLabel[langCode]}}
{{rewokeLabels[langCode]}}
X !
News
ERR
{{1723462260000 | amCalendar}}
share Facebook X (Twitter) e-mail
The Newnew Polar Bear in Arkhangelsk, seen missing its portside anchor. Source: Viltaly V./fleetphoto.ru/Yle
News
Claiming it was an accident, Beijing has admitted that the Chinese-owned and Hong Kong-flagged container ship Newnew Polar Bear damaged the Balticconnector, an undersea gas pipeline between Estonia and Finland, last October.
The South China Morning Post reported Monday that Chinese authorities conducted an internal investigation and forwarded the results to the two European countries.
According to the Chinese-language report, the accident was caused by a strong storm.
Finland and Estonia are still conducting a joint criminal investigation centered on the NewNew Polar Bear.
Report inadmissible in Estonia
The paper writes that the report in question is circulating in various ministries now, however it is not admissible as official evidence in investigations. Both countries called on Beijing to respond to their urgent requests for information regarding the ship.
In Estonia, a spokesperson for the Prosecutor's Office said that this document has not been sent to their office, and that it "can't be used as evidence in an Estonian criminal investigation."
A spokesperson for Finland's National Bureau of Investigation (KRP) declined to confirm whether it had received this document, but said that its own investigation is ongoing.
The investigation has involved cooperation with the Chinese authorities, and the KRP has, among other things, "submitted a request for legal assistance to the competent Chinese authorities," said KRP communications director Anna Zareff.
"It must be stated that the investigation is still ongoing, and final conclusions [regarding] what was behind these incidents (technical failure, negligence/poor seamanship, deliberate act), can be made only after all necessary investigative measures have been finalized, and this will still take some time," she noted.
China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not respond to a request by the South China Morning Post for comment.
Anchor linked to pipeline damage
On October 8, 2023, an anchor of the Hong Kong-registered vessel Newnew Polar Bear damaged the Balticconnector gas pipeline.
The incident occurred in the Finnish Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), where Finnish authorities retrieved the anchor from the seabed on October 24.
Finland's National Bureau of Investigation (KRP) reported that the same type of paint was identified on the anchor as on the Balticconnector and that it most likely belonged to the Newnew Polar Bear.
Follow ERR News on Facebook and Twitter and never miss an update!
Editor:
Karl Kivil, Aili Vahtla
balticconnector newnew polar bear
Message ERR News
Related
Captain of ship that destroyed Balticconnector pipeline appears in Hong Kong court
What are Russian research vessels doing in the Baltic Sea?
Foreign minister on Riigikogu delegation's China visit: It does not look good
Security expert: Estonia should have pushed harder in Balticconnector investigation
Prime minister: Still too early to talk in detail about Balticconnector situation
Minister skeptical over PRC explanation on Balticconnector damage
€35 million Balticconnector gas pipeline repair work finished
Balticconnector case more sabotage than an accident, experts say
Anchor that broke pipeline and cables could have been dragged for hundreds of kilometers
Anchor found next to Balticconnector belongs to Newnew Polar Bear
Photo: Chinese ship that crossed gas pipeline is missing anchor
Balticconnector pipeline between Estonia and Finland closed due to gas leak
news in simple estonian
LIVE
Lihtsad uudised 18. septembril
european day of languages quiz
LIVE
Moomin stories in different languages to feature in European Day of Languages
listen: radio tallinn
LIVE
watch: jupiter
LIVE
About us
ERR News is the English-language service of Estonian Public Broadcasting, run by a fully independent editorial team.
To read up on ERR News' comments rules and to contact ERR's other services, please follow the link below.
Staff, contacts & comments
Latest news
12:12
Estonian scientists to solve practical problems of over 180 companies
12:03
Tallinn to turn vacant land by Linnahall into tucked-away recreation area
11:29
Japanese ballet pro, Turkish tech CEO make Estonia home
10:58
Tartu court convicts fulling station chain Olerex, owner in false data case
10:31
Government's economic growth advisory body wraps up
10:00
Experts' proposals: Estonia's regional policy needs a reboot
09:46
Minister: Estonia's threat assessment unchanged after Denmark report
09:23
Reform Party and Parempoolsed head up in the polls
09:12
From tarantulas to a stork nest fire, Tallinn rescuers come to animals' aid
08:40
Interior Ministry now publishes deceased people's personal data online
be prepared!
Ole valmis! ' crisis preparedness app" href="//news.err.ee/1609637290/be-prepared-download-the-ole-valmis-crisis-preparedness-app"> LIVE
Download the ' Ole valmis! ' crisis preparedness app
LIVE
Reminder: How to act when Estonia's EE‑ALARM public warning alert is issued
LIVE
Where can I find crisis information for Estonia?
Most Read articles
23.09
Magnitude 1.4 quake shakes northwestern Estonia
24.09
Tallinn school asks ministry for €400,000 in emergency funds to finish out the year
24.09
Baltic states ask EU for €500 million in additional support for drone defense
23.09
Swedish prisoners complaining of conditions in Tartu prison
24.09
Estonia imposes own sanctions on delisted Russian oligarch pair
24.09
Investor: Baltic defense forces cool on domestic drones
24.09
Pärnu man shot dead by police after pointing 'gun' at officer
24.09
Rail Baltica delays leave local communities disappointed
24.09
Housing prices rise 6% on year as market rebounds
24.09
Trans activists accuse state gender committee of bias and obstruction
public broadcasters launch news portal
LIVE
European public broadcasters launch joint trusted news portal
useful information
LIVE
Commenting on ERR News articles
Top
Hea lugeja, näeme et kasutate vanemat brauseri versiooni või vähelevinud brauserit.
Parema ja terviklikuma kasutajakogemuse tagamiseks soovitame alla laadida uusim versioon mõnest meie toetatud brauserist:
x Sulge