Captain of ship that destroyed Balticconnector pipeline appears in Hong Kong court | News | ERR
{{noticeUi.heading[langCode]}}
{{infoLink[langCode].label}}
{{noticeUi.allowAllLabel[langCode]}}
{{rewokeLabels[langCode]}}
X !
News
ERR
{{1751688840000 | amCalendar}}
share Facebook X (Twitter) e-mail
Chinese ship Newnew Polar Bear in Arkhangelsk. The photo shows that the ship has no anchor. Source: Viltaly V. / fleetphoto.ru/Yle
News
The captain of the Chinese vessel Newnew Polar Bear, which damaged the Balticconnector gas pipeline between Finland and Estonia in October 2023, appeared before a court in Hong Kong on Friday, Finnish newspaper Helsingin Sanomat reports.
In August 2024, the South China Morning Post reported that China had admitted the vessel damaged the Balticconnector gas pipeline.
The captain appeared for a preliminary hearing at 1:30 p.m. local time. However, the case could not proceed because it turned out the captain did not have a lawyer.
A Helsingin Sanomat reporter present at the hearing noted that when the judge asked the captain who was responsible for the incident, the courtroom fell silent.
The 43-year-old captain remained completely silent as the judge tried to discuss the case with him.
Damage to the Balticconnector pipeline. Source: Finnish Border Guard It was unclear whether anyone was translating the proceedings for him in the courtroom. The judge spoke Cantonese, but a Mandarin-speaking interpreter was also present.
The captain is Chinese, but the trial is taking place in Hong Kong as the Newnew Polar Bear was sailing under the Hong Kong flag.
The man has been held in pretrial detention in Hong Kong since May. Prosecutors consider the captain responsible for damaging the Balticconnector gas pipeline in October 2023.
He has been charged with causing damage. In addition to the criminal charge, he is also accused of violating maritime safety regulations.
The charges were addressed during the preliminary hearing held in Hong Kong on Friday. The captain returned to court again at 3:11 p.m., still without legal representation. When the judge asked why he did not have a lawyer, the captain replied that he had no money.
The anchor raised from the seabed. Source: Soome keskkriminaalpolitsei The judge expressed surprise that the defendant had not accepted the duty lawyer offered that morning. The judge asked whether the captain wanted a public defender for the next hearing, which will take place on September 26. The captain said yes.
The captain complained that the investigation into his case had taken too long. According to him, he was already questioned last year by the Chinese authorities.
The judge emphasized that the interrogations conducted by Chinese authorities had no bearing on the ongoing court proceedings in Hong Kong.
When the captain was asked whether he wished to be released on bail, he shook his head.
Finnish authorities are still investigating the case and have said the pipeline was damaged by the ship's anchor.
The damage to the Balticonnector pipeline was the first in a series of incidents that saw underwater pipelines and cables in the Baltic Sea by ships dragging their anchors.
Follow ERR News on Facebook , Bluesky and X and never miss an update!
Editor:
Helen Wright, Valner Väino
Source:
Helsingin Sanomat
balticconnector newnew polar bear
Message ERR News
Related
Ship captain pleads not guilty to Balticconnector damage charges
Finland detains vessel after cable damaged between Tallinn and Helsinki
Estonian researcher took part in cutting-edge polar research vessel test
Experts: Russia lacks resources to escort all of its shadow fleet vessels
Newnew Polar Bear captain arrested in Hong Kong over Baltic Sea cable break
Latvian State Radio and TV Center's optic cable damaged in Baltic Sea
Tony Lawrence: The Baltic Sea has not become a NATO lake
Eagle S captain speaks to Finnish daily amid probe into Estlink cable damage
China admits container ship Newnew Polar Bear damaged undersea gas pipeline
Balticconnector case more sabotage than an accident, experts say
Anchor that broke pipeline and cables could have been dragged for hundreds of kilometers
Anchor found next to Balticconnector belongs to Newnew Polar Bear
news in simple estonian
LIVE
Lihtsad uudised 18. septembril
european day of languages quiz
LIVE
Moomin stories in different languages to feature in European Day of Languages
listen: radio tallinn
LIVE
watch: jupiter
LIVE
About us
ERR News is the English-language service of Estonian Public Broadcasting, run by a fully independent editorial team.
To read up on ERR News' comments rules and to contact ERR's other services, please follow the link below.
Staff, contacts & comments
Latest news
12:12
Estonian scientists to solve practical problems of over 180 companies
12:03
Tallinn to turn vacant land by Linnahall into tucked-away recreation area
11:29
Japanese ballet pro, Turkish tech CEO make Estonia home
10:58
Tartu court convicts fulling station chain Olerex, owner in false data case
10:31
Government's economic growth advisory body wraps up
10:00
Experts' proposals: Estonia's regional policy needs a reboot
09:46
Minister: Estonia's threat assessment unchanged after Denmark report
09:23
Reform Party and Parempoolsed head up in the polls
09:12
From tarantulas to a stork nest fire, Tallinn rescuers come to animals' aid
08:40
Interior Ministry now publishes deceased people's personal data online
be prepared!
Ole valmis! ' crisis preparedness app" href="//news.err.ee/1609637290/be-prepared-download-the-ole-valmis-crisis-preparedness-app"> LIVE
Download the ' Ole valmis! ' crisis preparedness app
LIVE
Reminder: How to act when Estonia's EE‑ALARM public warning alert is issued
LIVE
Where can I find crisis information for Estonia?
Most Read articles
23.09
Magnitude 1.4 quake shakes northwestern Estonia
24.09
Tallinn school asks ministry for €400,000 in emergency funds to finish out the year
24.09
Baltic states ask EU for €500 million in additional support for drone defense
23.09
Swedish prisoners complaining of conditions in Tartu prison
24.09
Estonia imposes own sanctions on delisted Russian oligarch pair
24.09
Investor: Baltic defense forces cool on domestic drones
24.09
Pärnu man shot dead by police after pointing 'gun' at officer
24.09
Rail Baltica delays leave local communities disappointed
24.09
Housing prices rise 6% on year as market rebounds
24.09
Trans activists accuse state gender committee of bias and obstruction
public broadcasters launch news portal
LIVE
European public broadcasters launch joint trusted news portal
useful information
LIVE
Commenting on ERR News articles
Top
Hea lugeja, näeme et kasutate vanemat brauseri versiooni või vähelevinud brauserit.
Parema ja terviklikuma kasutajakogemuse tagamiseks soovitame alla laadida uusim versioon mõnest meie toetatud brauserist:
x Sulge