Finland: Court dismisses Baltic Sea cable cuts case
Skip to content
Skip to main menu
Skip to more DW sites
In focus
German politics AI Russia
Latest audio Latest videos
Live TV
Advertisement
https://p.dw.com/p/51RbJ
Three crew members from the ship are believed to belong to Russia's so-called 'shadow fleet' (FILE: December 30, 2024) Image: Vesa Moilanen/Lehtikuva/AFP Advertisement
A Finnish district court on Friday dismissed a case against the captain and two officers of the Eagle S oil tanker who were accused of breaking undersea power and internet cables in the Baltic Sea , saying Finland does not have jurisdiction to prosecute them.
"The District Court has today issued a judgment dismissing the charge in the case... along with the claims for damages arising from the charge, as it was not possible to apply Finnish criminal law to the case," the court said in a statement.
What is the Baltic cable cut case about?
The incident took place on December 25 last year when a string of cable and gas pipeline outages in the Baltic Sea prompted NATO forces in the region to to go on high alert.
The crew is accused of dragging the ship's anchor in the seabed for about 90 kilometers (56 miles), damaging five undersea cables in the Gulf of Finalnd.
Finnish prosecutors had argued that the crew neglected their duties intentionally after leaving the Russian port of Ust-Luga.
All three crew members deny the allegations and said they were unaware that the anchor was not in order.
"If a ship drags an anchor behind it for several hours for 90 kilometers, is it really possible that no one would notice?" prosecutor Mikko Larkia had said at the start of the trial.
Europe's undersea cables under attack?
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video
Why is the case important?
The December 25th incident is only one of several similar occurences over the last two years.
Some officials and experts have pointed it out as Russian sabotage. Others have called it an accident.
Russia has denied the allegations.
The Eagle S crew is believed to be a part of Russia's "shadow fleet, " a group of old oil tankers operated under various flags but controlled by Moscow to bypass sanctions imposed by Europe and the US over Russia's war in Ukraine.
The case in Finland was the first attempt to convict the suspected perpetrators but the matter is complicated due to international maritime laws and difficulty in proving intent.
Edited by: Wesley Dockery
Advertisement
Skip next section More on Law and Justice from Europe More on Law and Justice from Europe
Judges: As AfD ascends, Germany must bolster justice system
Judges and prosecutors urge the coalition to act to prevent "extremists in government" from abusing the legal system.
Law and Justice 09/17/2026 September 17, 2026
Serbian President Vucic criticizes Kosovo war crimes verdict
President Aleksandar Vucic has said the war crimes tribunal in The Hague failed to fully address crimes against Serbs.
Law and Justice 09/17/2026 September 17, 2026
Shock in Kosovo as Hague convicts former President Thaci
The conviction of former President Hashim Thaci and three former leaders of the KLA has caused consternation in Kosovo.
Law and Justice 09/16/2026 September 16, 2026
Show more
Skip next section Related topics Related topics
Baltic Sea Black Sea Russia Finland Russia's partial mobilization Dmitry Medvedev BRICS