Russia’s GRU believed to be behind 2024 European parcel blasts; 22 suspects identified, police say | The Straits Times
Log in / sign up for free
Menu
Russia’s GRU believed to be behind 2024 European parcel blasts; 22 suspects identified, police say
Sign up now: Get ST's newsletters delivered to your inbox
Four parcels mailed from Lithuania and transported by DHL and DHD had explosive-incendiary charges.
PHOTO: REUTERS
Published Mar 07, 2026, 12:44 AM
Updated Mar 07, 2026, 02:05 PM
Set as preferred source
Listen
Summarise
22 suspects were identified across Europe regarding exploding parcel attacks in 2024, suspected to be orchestrated by Russia's GRU.
Suspects from Russia, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, and Ukraine were recruited and exploited due to their socio-economic vulnerabilities.
Five suspects in Lithuania face trial for terrorism, while investigations continue across Europe and in the US and Canada, with potential links to Russia.
AI generated
VILNIUS – European police agencies said on March 6 that 22 people had been identified as being part of attacks involving a series of exploding parcels in Europe in 2024, which the Russian military intelligence service was suspected of being behind.
Explosions occurred in courier depots in Britain, Germany and Poland, with security officials suggesting they were part of a test run for a Russian plot to trigger explosions on cargo flights to the United States.
Moscow has always denied allegations it was involved in any such operation, or other accusations of a wider sabotage campaign involving arson attacks aimed at destabilising allies of Ukraine.
Eurojust, the European Union’s justice cooperation agency, said on March 6 that a joint investigation by German, Polish, Dutch, British and Lithuanian detectives had identified 22 suspects in Lithuania and Poland who were suspected of working on behalf of Russia’s GRU intelligence agency.
“The suspected perpetrators were recruited from Russia, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania and Ukraine and were often in a vulnerable socio-economic situation,” the Eurojust statement said.
“It is suspected that the acts carried out by these suspects were executed on behalf of the military-intelligence service of the Russian Federation.”
Russia’s Defence Ministry, in charge of military intelligence, did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Moscow has previously denied accusations of targeting Western nations, often describing them as examples of Russophobia.
Lithuania’s deputy general prosecutor, Mr Arturas Urbelis, told a press conference that five suspects, citizens of Russia, Ukraine and Lithuania, would stand trial there accused of terrorism, facing up to 10 years in prison if found guilty.
Lithuania in 2025 said four parcels with “self-made, explosive-incendiary charges” had been mailed from Vilnius on July 19, 2024.
One of the parcels, shipped with DHL, caught fire at Leipzig airport in eastern Germany, shortly before it was due to be loaded onto a DHL plane bound for Britain, Lithuania said.
A second parcel exploded on a truck belonging to another parcel delivery service, DPD, as it was crossing Poland, while the third detonated in a DHL warehouse in Birmingham, England.
The fourth parcel, which was being transported on a DPD truck in Poland, failed to ignite owing to a malfunction, investigators said.
No one was injured in the incidents.
Eurojust said the investigation had also identified two “test packages” that had been sent to the US and Canada, as well as two parcels in Amsterdam intended for the same destinations.
British police said in a statement that counter-terrorism officers were still investigating the Birmingham incident.
In 2025, a Romanian man was arrested for assisting a foreign spy service and later released under investigation.
“The strength of cooperation in this case has led us to collectively identify what we believe to be Russian military intelligence involvement in a series of incidents across Europe,” said Ms Vicki Evans, Britain’s senior national coordinator for counter-terrorism policing. REUTERS
More on this topic
Germany warns against Russian ‘disposable agent’ recruitment
Three men guilty of UK arson attack on Ukraine-linked businesses ordered by Russia’s Wagner group
See more on
Russia
Terrorism
Bombings/Explosions
Britain
Germany
Back to top
E-paper
Newsletters
Podcasts
RSS Feed
About Us
Terms & Conditions
Personal Data Protection Notice
Need help? Reach us here.
Advertise with us
Download the app
Get unlimited access to exclusive stories and incisive insights from the ST newsroom
Subscribe
News titles published by SPH Media
The Straits Times | The Business Times | Lianhe Zaobao | Berita Harian | Tamil Murasu | Stomp
MDDI (P) 046/10/2025 . Published by SPH Media Limited, Co. Regn. No. 202120748H . Copyright © 2026 SPH Media Limited. All rights reserved.