Germany plans anti-drone shield over Leipzig attack
Skip to content
Skip to main menu
Skip to more DW sites
In focus
German politics AI Russia
Latest audio Latest videos
Live TV
Advertisement
https://p.dw.com/p/5LhC0
Germany reportedly plans a new shield against sabotage at critical sites Image: Ardan Fuessmann/IMAGO Advertisement
Germany is planning a comprehensive protective shield to prevent attacks like the failed assault on Leipzig airport, Interior Minister Alexander Dobrindt said Sunday.
On August 4, several small drones targeted Leipzig-Halle Airport in eastern Germany, with one hitting a parked plane, while another is thought to have struck an inbound cargo jet.
German intelligence agencies blamed Russia for the incident, which Moscow has denied.
Leipzig-Halle Airport is a major cargo hub used to fly weapons and supplies toward Ukraine Image: Daniel Kessler/imageBROKER/picture alliance
What did Dobrindt say about the shield?
Dobrindt told Bild am Sonntag newspaper that Russia's hybrid attacks are now a "daily" reality, adding: "These attacks will increase, but we can defend ourselves and protect ourselves."
The newspaper cited information from the Interior Ministry showing the government plans to expand the federal police's mobile drone-defense units.
The measures include vehicles and helicopters that can be quickly deployed to protect airspace over key cities like Frankfurt, Munich and Berlin to counter drone attacks.
Bild said the shield would not only intercept drones, but could also defuse drone bombs and other explosive devices.
The newspaper described how a change in the law would allow critical infrastructure operators — including water, power and defense companies — to detect and defend against drone sabotage.
Jammers flood drones with radio noise, so its pilot can no longer steer it Image: Michael Bihlmayer/Bihlmayerfotografie/IMAGO
Russia's Lavrov accuses Merz of wanting war
On Sunday, Russia's Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov claimed the German accusations levelled against Russia were "by ​and ​large, the ​start of ‌a real war."
He reiterated Russia's denial of any involvement with the Leipzig drone attack and criticized German Chancellor Friedrich Merz for wanting to boost the country's military capability in response to hybrid threats.
"All ‌these statements by Merz about making Germany the leading military power in ‌Europe once again — they are ‌being ​put into practice. He is, in effect, declaring war on us," Lavrov told Russian state-run TV channel Vesti.
He also criticized Germany's closure of Russian House cultural center in berlin and the Russian consulate in Bonn.
Putin denies Russian involvement in Leipzig drone attack
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video
New tech planned to boost cyber security
Bild also described how a national protective cyber shield would be set up to detect and intercept hacking attacks.
The measure comes amid hundreds of cyberattacks on government departments, infrastructure and companies each day, many of them blamed on Russia, other states and criminal gangs.
The newspaper said the government ⁠also wants to increase the use of AI, biometric facial recognition ⁠and video surveillance, especially at transport hubs, to identify suspected attackers before they carry out attacks.
Over 1,000 drone sightings in 2025
The head of Germany's Federal Criminal Police Office (BKA), Holger Münch, told Bild in December that more than a thousand suspicious drone flights were recorded over Germany last year.
These incidents mostly targeted military sites, airports, ports and defense firms and were treated as surveillance or harassment, rather than attacks.
Leipzig airport has been targeted by sabotage before. In July 2024, a suspected Russian incendiary parcel caught fire at the airport's DHL hub.
The cargo hub is also utilized by the Ukrainian military and NATO to airlift arms for use in the Ukrainian defense against Russia's invasion .
Edited by: Wesley Dockery
Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.
Advertisement
Skip next section Explore more Explore more
EU summons Russian envoy over failed Leipzig drone attack
EU summons Russian envoy over failed Leipzig drone attack
The EU's foreign policy chief Kaja Kallas said the attempted attack had "all the hallmarks of state-sponsored terrorism." She said the EU was summoning a Russian envoy, with France announcing a similar step.
Politics 09/02/2026 September 2, 2026
Russia's hybrid attacks on Germany: how should Berlin react?
Russia's hybrid attacks on Germany: how should Berlin react?
Germany holds Russia responsible for an attempted drone attack on Leipzig airport. But critics say Berlin's response, including the closure of Russia's consulate in Bonn, has been too timid.
Politics 09/02/2026 September 2, 2026
Skip next section More on Crime from Europe More on Crime from Europe
Cheap But Deadly - On the Trail of Product Counterfeiters
Germany, a key market for counterfeit goods in Europe: from fake designer brands to life-threatening medications.
Crime 09/22/2026 September 22, 2026
German police probe arson attack on Wuppertal synagogue
The man was detained near the scene shortly after allegedly trying to set fire to Wuppertal's synagogue.
Crime 09/18/2026 September 18, 2026
Organized crime and drug-related deaths rise Germany
In the annual report on organized crime, German police say cocaine is a danger for the state and society.
Crime 09/18/2026 September 18, 2026
Show more
Skip next section Related topics Related topics
Black Sea Germany Russia Russia's partial mobilization Dmitry Medvedev Russia's war in Ukraine BRICS