                  EUROPEAN
                  COMMISSION




                                        Brussels, 11.2.2026
                                        COM(2026) 81 final




     COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN
                PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL

            Action Plan on Drone and Counter Drone Security




EN                                                            EN
    1. Introduction

Drones, whether used in the air, at sea or on land, have become an integral part of modern
economies and societies. Unmanned, automated and increasingly supported by artificial
intelligence, they deliver tangible economic benefits across sectors such as construction,
energy, transport, agriculture, emergency response and logistics. Since 2019, the use of airborne
drones is governed in the European Union by a harmonised regulatory framework. The growing
role in surveillance and reconnaissance has also made drones a key component of Europe’s
security. From a European industrial perspective, the commercial airborne drone market
segment alone is forecast to be worth around EUR 14.5 billion by 2030 and potentially exceed
EUR 50 billion by 2033.

However, recent incidents involving malicious or irresponsible use of drones have exposed
significant and growing security challenges for the Union. Drones have been used in violation
of Member States’ airspace, they have disrupted airport operations, and caused near-misses
with civilian aircraft, highlighting vulnerabilities in our security architecture including in
aviation safety. In fact, the impact of these incidents extends well beyond airspace, affecting
the protection of critical infrastructure, external borders, ports, transport hubs and public spaces,
including densely populated areas, as well as maritime safety and energy security. Specifically,
in the energy sector, drones have been used to disrupt the operations of power plants, wind and
solar installations, district heating systems and energy transport vessels, demonstrating their
potential to undermine continuity of supply and economic resilience. Overflights by
unidentified or non-cooperative drones increase security tension and act as a signalling tool,
testing Union’s preparedness, as well as its capacity to respond and take countermeasures.

Hiding behind these security threats and challenges are a wide range of actors – state and state-
linked hostile actors, terrorist organisations, organised crime networks and individuals. They
span different levels of intensity, from criminal or negligent behaviour to hybrid operations and
military-type activities. They deliberately blur the boundaries between civilian and military
domains. They also exploit the cross-border nature of the internal market and shared
infrastructure making clear that a threat against one Member State is a threat against the
Union as a whole.

In this context, while safeguarding critical infrastructure, external borders, public spaces and
ensuring aviation and maritime security remain primarily the responsibility of Member States,
the cross-border character and high-impact of drone-related incidents make enhanced
coordination, shared preparedness and solidarity at EU level indispensable. An effective
response requires a comprehensive, coordinated and targeted approach, bringing together the
civil and military dimensions. This Action Plan is a response to the calls from Member States1
and the European Parliament2 to develop a united approach against the threats posed by
malicious drone operations. It is designed to support Member States through coordinated action
and to complement national measures, reinforcing a coherent and effective response.


1
 European Council conclusions of 23 October 2025. EUCO 18/25.
2
  European Parliament resolution of 9 October 2025 on a united response to recent Russian violations of the EU
Member States’ airspace and critical infrastructure (2025/2901(RSP)); European Parliament resolution of 22
January 2026 on drones and new systems of warfare – the EU’s need to adapt to be fit for today’s security
challenges (2025/2088(INI)).
                                                      1

EN                                                                                                   EN
This Action Plan ensures a coherent whole-of-government approach, in full respect of
relevant competences, while avoiding fragmentation. This Action plan focuses primarily on the
civilian internal security side, where important gaps and loopholes remain, it addresses the full
continuum of drone-related threats from the prevention of unintended or negligent incidents to
threats against the EU’s internal security and hybrid threats, while complementing and
supporting the work carried out in the defence domain. It sets out a prioritised set of actions in
the civilian field, designed to reinforce prevention, detection and response, and to strengthen
civil–military synergies as needed. It also strengthens Europe’s defence readiness, in line with
work carried out by the EU and Member States through several work-strands linked to the
Defence Readiness 2030 Roadmap.

Enhancing the security of drone operations and protection from malicious drone use are
prerequisites for trust, public acceptance and the large-scale deployment of legitimate drones.
This Action Plan therefore also supports a positive agenda on drones. By reinforcing security,
it contributes to the development of a competitive European drone market, unlocking the
potential for innovation, economic growth and job creation across sectors.

This Action Plan is to be read within the framework of a broader set of initiatives brought
forward by the Commission to reinforce the EU’s preparedness, and its internal security and
defence priorities. Considering the imminent security challenges, the Action Plan focuses on
actions that can be implemented in the short term, while also designing measures for longer-
term preparedness. While most recent threats concern airborne drones, the Action Plan also
covers terrestrial, maritime surface and undersea drones, and related counter-drone capacities,
as well as meteorological balloons used against some Member States. This Action Plan builds
on the 2023 Communication3on countering potential threats posed by drones and supersedes its
mid-term review as well as on the EU Drone Strategy 2.04 which provides the overarching
policy framework for the development of a competitive and safe European drone ecosystem.

    2. Prepare: increasing the resilience of the EU

The Action Plan focuses on strengthening resilience and preparedness. This relies, first, on
the capacity of Europe to remain at the edge of the technological evolution in drones and
counter-drone systems, but also on the capacity to ramp-up industrial production. Second, this
requires enhanced actions against malicious drones, with a safe and secure integration of drones
into the airspace and the market, as well as increased resilience measures to protect critical
infrastructures, external borders and public spaces, the maritime domain.

       2.1. Ramping up technological development and industrial production of drones
       and counter-drone systems

Drones are evolving rapidly, with advances in speed, range, payload, autonomy, swarming, AI
integration, advanced materials, miniaturisation and resistance to electronic warfare. Counter-
drone systems must therefore also adapt fast to keep pace with these evolutions. Supporting the
development of these technologies is essential for Europe’s preparedness. This requires
mobilising the right level of public and private investments at national and EU level, and from
both a civilian and defence perspective.


3 COM(2023) 659 final
4 COM(2022)652 final

                                                2

EN                                                                                        EN
EU funding programmes support the technological development of drones and counter-drone
capacities, notably through Horizon Europe or the European Defence Fund. Several schemes
are also dedicated to supporting specifically start-ups and scale up to grow, whether it is the
European Innovation Council (EIC) through its accelerator scheme, or the EU Disruptive
Innovation schemes (EUDIS) for defence applications through dedicated Hackathons and
Accelerators, EDA’s HEDI (Hub for EU Defence Innovation) as well as BraveTech EU,
allowing to build on battlefield-tested innovations from Ukraine. Private financing should also
be leveraged to support innovation and the ramping up of production.

However, there is an urgent need to increase coherence and impact between the different EU
instruments, including cohesion funds, as well as national investments, with a view to avoid
overlaps, reduce dispersion of funds and maximise impact on clear priorities. To that end, the
Commission proposes a new and coordinated framework to boost the technological
development and the production of drones and counter-drone systems building on five pillars.

First, the EU must focus its investment where it really matters. The Commission will initiate
with Member States a civil-military industrial mapping, designed to define the right priorities
in terms of technologies and capacities. This will inform the investments into the development
of technologies, their integration into drones and counter-drone systems and the necessary
industrial production ramp-up. Such an endeavour will require cooperation and exchange of
information between Member States, the Commission in consultation with the High
Representative, within their respective responsibilities, as well as different national and EU
actors across the civil and military domains.

Second, the EU must embrace a new approach to testing innovative solutions allowing faster
movement from lab to deployment. To that end and based on the Commission’s proposal for
regulatory sandboxes5, any obstacles to test innovative drone and counter-drone technologies
in specifically designated areas and under a temporary and controlled framework established
by a Member State or EASA should be removed. European industry needs infrastructure to test
and validate counter-drone solutions. The EU will aim to strengthen a network of
multinational test and expertise centres for drones across Member States, established to test,
demonstrate, validate and qualify military or dual-use systems in their specific operational
environments, such as the maritime Seabed Security Experimentation Centre (SEASEC).

The counter-drone Living Lab of the Joint Research Centre (JRC) will be upgraded into a
fully-fledged EU counter-drone centre of excellence. The Centre will work in synergy with
the EU Civil-Defence Drone Testing Centre Network which is currently in its pilot
implementation phase in cooperation with the European Defence Agency. It will run – on a
regular basis and whenever necessary – a large testing and validation programme of
counter-drone measures, starting with the first edition focused on the protection of critical
infrastructure. The Commission will also support the development of a harmonised testing
methodology6 for counter-drone systems and will issue a Recommendation on voluntary
performance requirements for counter-drone systems.



5
  Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on establishing a framework of
measures to facilitate the transport of military equipment, goods and personnel across the Union.
6
  Through the ongoing ISF funded project Courageous2.
                                                       3

EN                                                                                                     EN
Third, there is a need to bring clarity and security into the market through targeted safety
requirements and a certification scheme for counter-drone systems. Embedding safety
requirements into counter-drone testing and validation ensures that counter-drone measures do
not compromise aviation safety. EASA, as the competent authority for aviation safety, should
therefore develop criteria to be respected by counter-drone systems.

Fourth, interoperability is essential for drone and counter-drone producers to be able to scale
production for both the civilian and military markets, bringing flexibility, operational continuity
and fostering effective cross-border cooperation. Building on ongoing work by EASA, the
European Defence Agency and NATO to align civil-military standards, the Commission, with
the support of the High Representative, will examine ways to promote the use of standards
applicable to both civilian and military drone and counter-drone technologies.

Fifth, producing drones and counter-drone systems at scale is paramount. Many EU
industrial actors are ramping-up capabilities in different domains, including submarine drones.
The EU therefore needs to invest into massification of production capacities for deployable
drones and counter-drone systems, with specific attention to the needs of emergent innovative
companies. To that end, the European Commission will assess the possibility to leverage the
forthcoming Industrial Accelerator Act, as well as the joint deployment initiative for critical
infrastructure presented in section 4. Additionally, it will also use industry reinforcement
actions under the European Defence Industry Programme to boost the production in the EU of
drones and counter-drone capacities as described in section 5.

European efforts to scale-up drone and counter-drone production must be a joint public-private
effort. The Commission will expand industry engagement by convening a drone and counter-
drone Industrial Forum, building on the Drone Alliance initiative with Ukraine. This will
bring together a large ecosystem of underlying and enabling technologies such as chips, AI,
quantum, cloud and cyber. The Commission will furthermore consider options for public-
private partnership to address key technology gaps for the development and industrialisation of
EU produced drone systems.
        2.2. Enhanced internal security and resilience against drones
The growing presence of unregistered drones in the EU increases the risks of misuse. At the
same time, a wide range of state and non-state actors can exploit drones, as even basic “off the
shelf” models can be deployed over strategic assets with minimal efforts. The inherent plausible
deniability of such acts makes them an effective vector of hybrid threats, capable of causing
disruption and exploiting vulnerabilities. It is therefore urgent to level-up resilience
requirements across several areas.

2.2.1. Safe and secured integration of drones into the airspace and on the market

By the end of 2024, the EU drone ecosystem had surpassed two million registered operators,
representing an increase of around 20% in just one year. At the same time, professional and
higher-risk operations expanded rapidly, reflecting increasing organisational maturity among
operators7. This rapid professionalisation confirms drones as a permanent and expanding


7
 The number of operational authorisations increased almost five-fold, from around 700 to over 3 400, while
Light UAS Operator Certificates (LUCs) grew by more than 60%, Figures: EASA IAM Hub.
                                                      4

EN                                                                                                    EN
component of European aviation, while underscoring the urgency of reinforcing trust, security,
and resilience.

The EU has already established a comprehensive aviation framework for airborne drones,
providing a strong foundation for the safe development of a rapidly growing sector. However,
evolving security threats and recent incidents have highlighted limitations in the current
framework. The Commission, in close cooperation with EASA, will propose a Drone Security
Package to adapt the airborne drone framework to today’s security realities, while preserving
the conditions for innovation and market growth. It will amend the relevant implementing and
delegated acts8 stemming from the regulation on common rules for civil aviation9. The objective
is to strengthen the identification and accountability of drone operations, both for drone
operators and drone pilots, including by extending registration and identification requirements
to all drones above 100g. In this way, the link between operator registration and drone usability
will be strengthened, thereby avoiding the use of drones that cannot be identified.

At the same time, the safe expansion of legitimate drone operations requires a modern traffic-
management environment. The EU has already put in place a harmonised framework for U-
space10, which introduces digital services to support safe, automated and scalable drone
operations. While this framework is in force, its deployment across Member States remains
uneven. The Commission will therefore encourage and support a more active implementation
of U-space services, in line with national priorities and operational needs. It will also accelerate
work with Member States to improve the definition and digital publication11 of geographical
zones where drone operations are restricted or subject to conditions. Building on this, the
Commission, together with EASA and Member States, will assess the technical conditions for
future geofencing functionalities that could help prevent compliant drones from unintentionally
entering sensitive or high-risk areas.

The Commission will also present regulatory simplification measures for drones aimed at
introducing flexibility for certain operations12 such as removing the need of pre-approval by
authorities and reducing the associated administrative burden. This will also include a possible
extension of geo-awareness requirements to all drones above 100g.

The Commission will seek to mobilise relevant EU funding instruments to ensure effective and
coherent implementation across the Union of the measures outlined above.

Beyond the specific legislative needs and operational measures mentioned above to enhance
resilience, a central element of security is to make sure that drones placed on the EU market
meet appropriate security requirements so that legitimate drones cannot become a security risk
for EU citizens or be turned into threats vectors by malicious actors.

The Commission will therefore propose to initiate work with Member States on a coordinated
Union wide security risk assessment of drones and counter-drone capacities, assessing risks in
their ICT supply chain. This could be followed by a Drone and Counter-drone Security



8
  Implementing regulation (EU) 2019/947 & Delegated regulation 2019/945.
9
  Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 and the related implementing.
10
   Implementing regulations (EU) 2021/664, (EU) 2021/665 and (EU) 2021/666.
11
   Through for instance the EASA Innovative Air Mobility (IAM) Hub.
12
   For Visual Line Of Sight (VLOS), Beyond Visual Line Of Sight (-BVLOS) operations.
                                                    5

EN                                                                                          EN
Toolbox proposing proportionate security mitigation measures, in particular for the deployment
of counter-drone systems around critical infrastructures.

With the full application of the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) in December 2027, a large majority
of drones placed on the EU market will be subject to mandatory cybersecurity requirements,
thereby promoting security-by-design at product level. Given the important role of
semiconductors in the development and operations of autonomous systems, drone
manufacturers should embed trusted chips in their systems. This means chips that are secure,
reliable, and resistant to tampering or cyber threats.

At system level, the Commission will work also on the establishment of an EU Trusted Drone
Label to further enhance trust in civil drones. The label would rely on independent third-party
verification and define additional product-level trust and resilience criteria without duplicating
existing EU cybersecurity legislation.

Finally, in view of the fast-evolving markets of drones, and following calls from the European
Parliament13 and Member States14 to assess the continued relevance and effectiveness of the
EU Drone 2.0 Strategy, the 2026 progress review will provide a comprehensive stock-taking
of the Strategy, identifying gaps and delays in implementation, and assess whether its actions
remain fit for purpose or require adjustment, notably those contributing to security and
competitiveness.

2.2.2. Enhancing preparedness at external borders, public spaces and critical infrastructures

Enhancing EU’s preparedness means significantly investing into the protection of critical
infrastructures, including in the maritime domain, the external borders and public spaces.

When it comes to the physical resilience of critical infrastructures, the EU has put in place a
horizontal framework: the Critical Entities Resilience (CER) Directive, which requires
Member States to adopt a national resilience strategy, conduct risk assessments in all the eleven
sectors covered by the Directive, identify their critical entities and take the necessary to prevent
disruptive incidents. Urgent and full implementation of the CER directive by Member States
should be an immediate priority. To support Member States and critical entities, the
Commission will issue non-binding guidelines for resilience enhancing measures, including
on countering threats posed by drones and the use of geofencing functionalities. The
Commission will also propose to willing Member States a plan to stress test the resilience of
critical infrastructures against drone intrusion, based on the model of the previously
conducted stress testing of critical infrastructure in the energy sector and for submarine cables.

The maritime domain is particularly susceptible to threats and attacks by aerial, surface and
underwater drones. Enhanced maritime domain awareness is essential to protect critical
maritime infrastructure and serve military needs. Once established, the Regional Cable Hubs15,
could be expanded to ensure a broader Maritime Domain Awareness function, using drone
assets, and monitoring threats from drones16 with a view to protection especially all maritime
critical infrastructure.


13
   A European Lead Market for Civilian Drones – Now or Never.
14
   COUNCIL: 16054/25 REV 2.
15
   As referred into the Action Plan on Cable Security. JOIN(2025) 9 final.
16
   As elaborated under the EU Action Plan on Cable Security and in line with the European Ocean Pact, relevant
actions of the EU Maritime Security Strategy (EUMSS).
                                                      6

EN                                                                                                    EN
To this end, the Commission will launch a pilot action to enhance maritime domain
awareness. It could be implemented by Member States in the context of the Regional Cable
Hubs, promoting coast guard cooperation and involving European Fisheries Control Agency
(EFCA), European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) and Frontex. The pilot action will also
identify gaps and urgent operational needs for detecting and countering drones in the maritime
domain. It could be supported by EU defence programmes. Close cooperation with EDA
MARSUR project and NATO maritime surveillance systems will be ensured. The Commission
will also support the deployment of undersea sensing capacities, contributing to underwater
domain awareness capacities, useful both for the protection of critical infrastructure and for
defence maritime applications, especially in areas where infrastructures are subject to threats
(e.g. Baltic, Black Sea or Arctic regions).

Malicious use of drones can directly undermine control at the external borders and specifically
border surveillance by enabling reconnaissance of patrol patterns and border crossing points,
facilitating cross-border crime, and disrupting border management infrastructure and
operations. The Schengen Borders Code allows the use of civil counter-drone measures to
protect land and maritime borders, and by extension, where needed to prevent the
circumvention of border controls, extends to airport security perimeters.

The protection of public spaces from threats posed by non-cooperative drones has been at the
core of the current Commission counter-drone policy framework17. The objective is to provide
law enforcement authorities with the right capacities and training to respond to drone threats
and to use drones for public security objectives, such as crowd control. The Commission will
intensify its action to support law enforcement in these efforts, especially upgrading the
training to integrate the use of mitigation and neutralisation measures and extend it to operators
of critical infrastructures. The already established counter-drone expert group will be
extended to include relevant EU Agencies (e.g. Frontex, Europol, EASA, EDA). It will support
the identification of promising common counter-drone solutions, including by increasing the
frequency of classified information exchange. To facilitate this work, a biennial work
programme will be developed for the counter-drone expert group.

2.2.3. Protection against hybrid threats from other unmanned threat vectors such as balloons

Over the past year, several hundreds of meteorological balloons have been launched from
outside the EU into the airspace of some Member States for different illicit purposes including
smuggling. Typically fitted with SIM cards to transmit their location after landing, they allow
smugglers to recover the payload. Due to their size, weight, unpredictable wind-driven
trajectories, potential operating altitude, and payload capacity, these unmanned balloons pose
serious safety and security risks, particularly when overflying critical infrastructure such as
airports, where they can cause accidents or trigger closures. Their detection is especially
challenging as connectivity modules are usually inactive during flight. As a result, heavy
unmanned balloons represent a strategic and largely uncontrollable threat.

Several measures in this Action Plan could be useful to address threats from meteorological
balloons. There is a need to take additional measures to disrupt the possibility for criminals to
use such balloons and for state and non-state actors to exploit it as a tool of hybrid campaign.
The Commission proposes to organise a specific working group to address the multi-
dimensional aspect of the threats, looking at measures linked to connectivity, spectrum
monitoring, diversion of flight path as well as other ways to remedy the threats including

17
     Stemming from the 2023 Communication on countering threats posed by drones.
                                                      7

EN                                                                                        EN
cooperation between telecommunication operators and national authorities on national security
and defence matters. Moreover, in view of bringing innovative, quick and operational solutions
to increase the resilience against this type of threat, the Commission, together with the Member
States most concerned, will swiftly organise a mission driven call for interest to the private
sector, especially start-ups, to propose new ways to handle such threats.



 Key actions on preparedness:
 •   As a matter of priority, the Commission, together with Member States, where appropriate, will:
        ▪   Propose a Drone Security Package by Q3 2026 to rapidly adapt the regulatory
            framework to new security threats:
             o Ensure mandatory registration for all drone operators of smaller drones (above
                100g).
             o Extend drone direct remote identification obligation to smaller drones (above
                100g).
             o Avoid take-off of drones unless an operator identification number has been
                entered.
             o Introduce regulatory simplification and flexibility for certain operations.

        ▪   Work with willing Member States on a voluntary plan to stress test the resilience
            of critical infrastructures against drone intrusion.

        ▪   Adopt non-binding CER guidelines on resilience enhancing measures for critical
            entities with targeted guidance on countering threats posed by drones (Q2 2026).

        ▪   Issue a Recommendation on voluntary performance requirements for counter-drone
            systems (Q4 2026)

        ▪   Launch by Q3 2026 a Coordinated Security risk assessment on drones and counter-
            drone capacities, with a view to adopt a Drone Security Toolbox.

        ▪   Launch in Q2 2026 a drone and counter-drone industrial forum – the “D-TECT
            Forum” (Drone TEch for Countering Threats).

        ▪   Support the scaling up of drone and counter-drone start-ups and the ramping up of
            production capacities.

        ▪   Gather immediately a working group with interested Member States targeting
            balloon threats and launch in Q2 2026 a dedicated hackathon on balloons threats,
            for the industry and start-up community to propose innovative solutions.




                                               8

EN                                                                                      EN
  •     The Commission, will follow up with Member States, in order to:
          ▪   Develop by Q4 2026 an EU Trusted Drone Label to enhance trustworthiness of civil
              drones placed on the market.

          ▪   Improve by Q4 2026 the availability of UAS geographical zone information, and
              by 2027 establish the technical requirements for geofencing function.

          ▪   Establish by Q1 2027 a EU counter-drone centre of excellence and launch testing
              programmes, integrating aviation safety requirements. Support the development of full
              standard for a harmonised testing methodology for countering unmanned aircraft
              systems.

          ▪   Launch by 2027 a pilot action to enhance maritime domain awareness to counter
              surface and undersea drone threats

          ▪   Expand in Q1 2026 the composition of the Commission-chaired Counter-drone
              Expert Group (CUASG) to include relevant EU Agencies (e.g. Frontex, Europol,
              EDA, EASA).

          ▪   Upgrade by Q2 2026 the training cycle for law enforcement operators to include
              mitigation and neutralisation measures.



      3. Detection: increasing the capacity to detect threats from drones

Detection, tracking and identification are central elements in the fight against malicious drone
activities. Being able to distinguish friends from foes helps to filter and classify detected drones
according to their risk profiles, allowing ultimately to focus the attention and the resources of
security authorities. This requires seriously enhancing situational awareness around drone
operations, including through the integration of several information feeds which today are not
connected. It also requires enhancing detection capacities through the deployment of a multi-
sensing approach and leveraging technological evolution as well as telecommunication
networks.

         3.1. Improved situational awareness

The absence of integrated air surveillance for drone activities, combined with the inherent
limitations of detection capacities, allows malicious actors to potentially evade detection, at
least temporarily, and create plausible deniability. It is therefore essential to improve situational
awareness of drone operations.

First, there is a need to support the integration of relevant data into dedicated single display
systems. Based on the existing regulatory framework such as U-space, as well as a strengthened
registration obligations in the future, it will be possible to establish a capacity to detect, track
and identify in near real time any legitimate drones. Different information feeds will need to be
fused. In this regard, Eurocontrol has developed a single air display system – CIMACT (Civil-
Military Air Traffic Management Coordination tool), allowing the detection and identification,
                                                 9

EN                                                                                           EN
in real time of potential threats from drones. The Commission will support the emergence of
such tools integrating detection and identification data as well as upstream enablers to
distinguish between authorised and non-cooperative drone activity. Looking ahead, enhanced
situational awareness could be further strengthened through the gradual development of drone
conspicuity solutions, building on U-space, registration and identification frameworks.

Second, relevant data should be accessible by competent authorities. The EU regulatory
framework for aviation safety already provides the legal basis for it18. Building on this, Member
States should make practical arrangements to ensure that relevant data is shared among
competent authorities in civil aviation, law enforcement and the military. This would allow to
monitor and assess the level of threats, ensure faster response, and enforce liability for operators
of drones that do not respect security measures.

Third, it is essential to foster more information sharing between Member States to improve
lessons learnt from previous incidents and establish a clear situational picture. The
Commission will therefore explore with Member States the possibility of progressively setting
up an operational, secured, user-friendly and trusted EU drone incident platform, building on
regulatory reporting of incidents where relevant and an existing open-source digital platform.
The platform would allow a near real-time feed of relevant incidents and be accessible to
relevant national authorities. The platform could support the creation of a structured database
of non-authorised drones and would benefit from the development of common data format for
counter-drone systems. The Commission will support initiatives from willing Member States
to enhance information sharing, for instance at regional level.

Fourth, detection, tracking and identification capabilities should also be integrated into
national border surveillance systems and contribute to the European situational picture,
including EUROSUR19, to enable operational support and the coordinated handling of cross-
border incidents. This should also, where appropriate, cover relevant detections in the context
of Frontex operations. The Commission will support willing Member States in seeking civil-
military synergies with military situational awareness systems and security systems, in full
respect of EU legislation.

           3.2. Deployment of multi-domain sensing capacities

Detection of illegitimate and potentially malicious drones necessarily relies on several sensors.
Traditional radar-based detection comes with specific characteristics. Long-range radars detect
larger objects at higher altitude, while short-range radars are focusing on short distance
tracking. Additionally, different characteristics of drones and drone operations present
challenges, such as the reflection of the terrain, the small radar cross section of drones, the low
altitude at which drones can fly, and the risk of saturation in case of drone swarms.
Consequently, detection of malicious drones requires a multi-sensor approach, integrated
through AI-powered command-and-control (C2) software, allowing to establish clear
situational awareness, in particular to protect critical infrastructure.

Ongoing technological developments will enhance detection capacities. For instance, in the
domain of both passive and active radar systems, software-defined radars in the X band and

18
     Regulation (EU) 2018/1139, Article 74.
19
     European Border Surveillance system.
                                                10

EN                                                                                          EN
beyond can provide enhanced detection capacities. Other areas of interest are acoustic sensors
such as AI-powered acoustic phased array microphones, LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging)
using pulsed laser, thermal infrared cameras allowing to detect small variations of heat, and
optical sensors.

The EU should enhance its support for home grown development of these dual use
technologies, that must be integrated into multi-domain sensing systems, supported by a
modular, distributed, AI-powered C2, and encrypted communication. These systems could
either be deployed to protect specific critical infrastructure on a permanent basis or be mounted
on terrestrial or maritime vehicles for increased flexibility. These are civilian by design, but
they could usefully complement existing military capacities to enhance the overall detection
capacities. Interoperability – through the deployment of recognised standards – is key to allow
modularity with legacy and future sensors as well as effectors, and smooth integration with air
defence or air surveillance systems. These modular capacities could be usefully deployed
through a joint procurement programme for the protection of specific critical infrastructure.20

        3.3. Leveraging telecommunication networks for enhanced detection

Existing 5G telecommunication networks could be leveraged to enhance and broaden the
detection of drones. The EU and its Member States should support the deployment of a two-
layered cellular based drone detection and tracking capacity.

On the first layer, existing network capacity should be used to detect connected drones by
identifying unusual SIM card identities, types of data transmission or activities. Networks
should provide behaviour-based alerts of fast-moving assets over non-traditional paths, forming
AI-based automated detection and early alert systems. This method of detection would rely on
a strong partnership between national authorities, and telecommunication operators. It requires
also solid industrial partnerships between AI companies and telecommunication providers and
operators as well as a full implementation of the 5G Cybersecurity Toolbox2122.

This connectivity tracking capacity could be enhanced with the deployment of the concept of
“digital airspace” providing 5G-based connectivity to drones – and therefore allowing their
detection - in higher altitudes than today. To this end, the Commission is working with Member
States on an Implementing Decision to ensure sufficient harmonised spectrum availability
in the traditional harmonised terrestrial mobile frequency bands. This will enable safe
operations of drones over large distances. It would also design a mechanism to differentiate
a drone from other users and establish an obligation to condition connectivity to the mobile
network to a pre-identification as drone.

On the second layer, cellular sensing should be leveraged to detect non-connected drones.
Integrated and Sensing Communication (ISAC) integrates sensing into the mobile
communication network. It can in effect turn 5G and next-generation antennas into radar
sensors, able to detect the spatial location of any flying unidentified object, including balloons.
In the short term, such technology could be deployed above certain locations such as critical

20
   See section 4.
21
   See https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/cybersecurity-5g-networks-eu-toolbox-risk-mitigating-
measures
22
   In line with Cyber Security Act revision COM(2026) 11 and the Digital Network Act COM(2026) 16 .
                                                       11

EN                                                                                                       EN
infrastructure facilities. If and when fully deployed over a territory or a large region, it could be
the basis of digital twins, representing digitally the physical presence of objects in the airspace.
This could have also potential military applications such as complementing existing military
air surveillance systems or detecting radio frequency jamming.

ISAC is being tested by European telecommunications providers, and initial steps have been
taken for its standardisation, especially in the framework of 6G. To accelerate its deployment,
the Commission will propose the necessary regulatory changes, such as ensuring that spectrum
allocation allows sensing, while limiting interference with aviation. To that end, the relevant
provisions have been foreseen in the recently proposed Digital Networks Act. At short term,
the Commission will propose a mandate to the CEPT (European Conference of Postal and
Telecommunications Administrations) to develop technical and operational conditions for
sensing, which would be followed by an amended harmonisation decision allowing spectrum
to be used for sensing.

Additionally, the Commission will explore with Member States ways to leverage, for both
civilian and military usage, 5G telecommunication networks for distributed computing
capacity, looking at edge and cloud solutions.

The Commission will support Member States willing to live test and deploy these new
detection capacities to protect critical infrastructure or scale this detection capacity across a
territory serving the military, law enforcement and any other relevant authorities. The
Commission will also invited Ukraine to consider its participation in these activities. The
deployment of cellular sensing capacities along the borders of Member States most impacted
by threats from drones or other flying objects such as balloons could be considered. An
appropriate national governance framework will have to be established between civilian and
military authorities, telecommunication equipment suppliers, tower owners, telecommunication
operators and infrastructure manager, to make sure that national security requirements are
explicitly satisfied.

Key actions on detection:
As a matter of priority, the Commission, together with Member States, will:
    •   Launch a Call for Expressions of Interest to Member States, Ukraine and European
        industrial partners to live test and deploy cellular-based, dual-use drone detection
        capacity (Q2 2026):
           o AI-based early alert mechanism of malicious connected drones enhanced by the
                digital airspace concept;
           o Cellular sensing detection of non-connected drones;
           o Embedding cellular sensing into current and upcoming military applications.

    •   Take the necessary regulatory steps to allow spectrum to be used for sensing through
        an amended spectrum harmonisation decision.




                                                 12

EN                                                                                           EN
The Commission will also follow-up with Member States in order to:
   •     Improve situational awareness through
           o The integration of relevant data into dedicated single display systems;
           o Exploring the progressive establishment an EU drone incident platform;
           o Integrating detection, tracking and identification capabilities into national
               border surveillance systems;
           o Common data formats for counter-drone capabilities.

   •     Strongly encourage Member States to set up an information-sharing framework
         between civil aviation authorities, law enforcement and military.



    4. Response: Stronger EU cooperation and solidarity

Whenever an incident occurs and one or more malicious drones are detected, threats must be
promptly and effectively addressed. Operational incident response is the responsibility of
Member States, given the strong link with national security and defence matters. However,
coordinated actions at EU level can support Member States in the deployment of counter-drone
capacities and solutions. This dimension requires strong civilian-military synergies, and well
defined and rehearsed rules of engagement based on the threat.

       4.1.   Operational synergies between civilian and military
When it comes to collective air defence, NATO holds a primary role to protect against
conventional threats, such as high-end air and missile threats. With the emergence of drone
threats, especially low-cost systems, air defence is evolving, requiring an additional layer of
counter-drone network. At the same time, protecting borders, airports, seaports, energy
infrastructure and sensitive sites from low-cost drones cannot rely on the military alone. This
highlights the necessary civil and military coordination. Counter-drone capacities must be
approached as a dynamic, adaptable and comprehensive network, for both civilian security and
defence purposes.

Once a threat is detected, national protocols are activated leading to preventive measures (such
as airspace closure), as well as counter-drone measures from a wide array of solutions. While
these procedures are decided and operated at national level, there is a need to stress test them
against a scenario of cross border or multi-vector threats but also against emerging threats such
as swarmed or miniaturised drones.

Additionally, at very low altitude, counter-drone response requires seconds-long reaction times
and tightly synchronised civil–military procedures, which remain uneven across borders. The
cost asymmetry between low-cost threats and scarce defensive means, combined with mass and
saturation, makes fragmentation difficult to sustain. Divergent data formats, classification and
reporting chains prevent a shared low-altitude picture and complicate attribution in hybrid
scenarios. Addressing these gaps require interoperability, governance and rapid operational
delivery across ecosystems.

This is why it is important that relevant procedures and lines of communication are established
between all the actors, including at EU level. To that end, it is proposed to launch, with all
relevant civilian and military actors a yearly EU-level counter-drone exercise.
                                               13

EN                                                                                       EN
     4.2. Support on the deployment of counter-drone capacities
A multi-layered and multi-effector (combining several counter-drone technical measures)
approach is necessary to counter the large spectrum of threats posed by non-cooperative drones.
Counter measures rely on a combination of a wide array of solutions such as jammers, lasers,
high power microwaves, drone catchers, cyber takedown as well as hard kinetic solutions, for
instance individual or ‘in swarm’ strike drones, gunnery and short ranges missiles and
ammunition.

When drones are connected to a communication network, a possible counter measure includes
the capacity to disrupt, slow down, jam or end the connectivity of the malicious vectors, without
affecting the connectivity of friendly drones. Based on a request from relevant national
authorities, telecommunication operators should be in position to take the necessary measures
to ban the SIM or the connectivity module, operate a forceful detachment, or establish a
geofencing approach. The Commission is currently working on an Implementing Decision
harmonising operational and technical conditions for the safe operation of terminal devices such
as drones.

In light of the evolving security situation, it is essential and urgent that critical infrastructures
are equipped with the latest counter-drone equipment and systems. In full complementarity with
ongoing activities in the defence domain, the Commission will therefore work with Member
States to launch – through a call for expression of interest – an EU Counter-drone
Deployment Initiative for Critical infrastructure:

First, based on the mapping of needs described in section 2, the Commission will continue
supporting the development of home-grown counter-drone systems giving particular
attention to the support of innovative and scalable approaches, notably from new players across
defence and civilian ecosystems. In this perspective, it will work with industry, and Member
States, to define priority areas of investment under EU defence and civilian programmes, with
the view to scale the approach under the future European Competitiveness Fund.

Second, the Commission will propose a voluntary EU counter-drone joint purchasing
initiative for deploying counter-drone solutions in critical infrastructures. The objective is to
leverage the procurement capacity of relevant EU agencies (e.g. Frontex, EMSA, EFCA), as
well as creating synergies with joint procurement (including pre-commercial or innovative
procurement schemes) run by relevant national Ministries, notably defence or interior
ministries, in the context of the implementation of ISF, BMVI as well as SAFE23, EDIP24 and
the work of the Drone Capability coalition or, if the Member States choose to, the European
Defence Drone Initiative, the Eastern Flank Watch and the Air Shield initiatives, as well as the
implementation of the EU strategy for the Black sea and the Black Sea Maritime Security Hub.

     4.3. Building the “software layer” of counter-drone capacities



23
  Council Regulation (EU) 2025/1106 of 27 May 2025 establishing the Security Action for Europe (SAFE).
24
  Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Defence
Industry Programme and a framework of measures to ensure the timely availability and supply of defence
products. COM(2024)/150 final.
                                                     14

EN                                                                                                   EN
Effective counter-drone capabilities are necessarily powered by a Command and Control (C2)
system, the software layer allowing to integrate the sensors and the effectors, as the experience
of Ukraine has shown. To detect and counter sophisticated and coordinated threats from drones
it is essential that Member States jointly develop sovereign European Command and Control
(C2) capacities, powered by AI software, high level of cybersecurity, state-of-the-art
encryption, secured cloud on the edge, and high-performance computing capacity.
Interoperable by design, dual by nature, these C2 solutions, should be able to work in synergies
with detection capacities and designed to engage with multiple effectors against malicious
drones. They should allow integrating legacy equipment, interacting with each other and with
relevant civilian and defence systems. In line with the Apply AI strategy, the AI Gigafactories
currently being established with the support of the EU budget should facilitate the development
of such C2 capacities.

        4.4. Solidarity: Rapid counter-drone emergency response teams
Facing threats or to secure targeted sites in anticipation of events, Member States must be able
to rely on an enhanced, rapid and scalable European solidarity. This is particularly relevant,
when the nature or the scale of threats exceeds the capacities of a Member State to respond.

The Commission proposes to work with Member States to set up Rapid Counter-drone
Emergency Response Teams that could act as rapidly deployable reserve units, equipped with
the latest technologies for detection and response, at the request of a Member State authority in
a mutual assistance approach. The Emergency Response Coordination Centre could provide the
necessary support, as appropriate. The Commission will explore how this can build on the
expansion of the pooling and sharing mechanisms of the EU-funded law enforcement
networks25, the Protective Security Advisory (PSA) Programme, and EU agencies (e.g.
Frontex) to provide cross-border coverage and the deployment of mobile units in the context of
high-risk and high-profile events while maintaining interoperability. It would also work in
synergies with existing capabilities such as the EU Hybrid Rapid Response Teams.

      4.5. Counter-drone capacity integrated in border management
The EU’s external borders are subject to intense drone threats across land and maritime border
sections and their vicinity. Frontex supports Member States in addressing these threats. It
deploys drones for border surveillance in joint operations and promotes interoperability.

The Commission will support Frontex in the organisation of drone and counter-drone
pilots, live demonstrations and prize-based innovation challenges in realistic border settings. It
will enhance the integration of drones and counter-drone skills into the training of the standing
corps. Frontex will also provide practical guidance on layered deployment models and cross-
border incident handling.

The Border Management and Visa Instrument (BMVI) supports Member States in
improving border surveillance and detection of threats at the EU’s external borders, including
on drones and counter-drone capacities. The Commission has evaluated applications received
for a EUR 150 million call for equipment. The aim is to support Member States in purchasing



25
     Such as the High-Risk Security Network- HRSN or ATLAS
                                                   15

EN                                                                                        EN
uncrewed equipment for aerial and maritime surveillance with the ultimate objective of
deployment by Frontex in joint operations.

Additionally, a recent EUR 250 million call to better secure EU external borders, including
against drones, was published in December 2025. It targets Member States experiencing
increased and complex pressure on border management and it supports them in one or more of
the three priority areas: the direct purchase of drones and counter-drone systems for external
borders, the integration of drones and counter-drone systems into national border surveillance
systems and the deployment of innovative technologies and communication systems to address
hybrid threats affecting external borders and border crossing points including those in
international airports. To facilitate implementation and interoperability, the Commission
encourages coordinated approaches among interested Member States, including cooperation
through joint/cross-border innovation procurement and joint procurement, where relevant.

    4.6.       Towards an EU level counter-drone regulatory framework
Today, the legal and operational frameworks for countering non-cooperative or unsafe drone
activity remain highly fragmented across the Union, as demonstrated by a recent comprehensive
mapping study of Member States’ regulatory frameworks for counter-drone systems.

Most Member States rely on dispersed provisions in aviation, police, defence and
telecommunications legislation, and only a few have started developing integrated national
counter-drone strategies. Some Member States have no national rules at all. Civilian and critical
infrastructure operators typically lack legal authority to neutralise a threatening drone. Active
mitigation measures such as jamming, spoofing or kinetic intervention remain restricted to
military and specialised police units due to strict spectrum-interference and aviation-safety
rules. As a result, some operators can detect threats but cannot respond effectively to them,
which delays neutralisation and increases security risks.

There is therefore a need to consider expanding the framework of the 2023 Communication on
countering threats posed by drones towards a set of common binding and non-binding rules
for Member State authorities and private operators to clarify roles and mandates of all
actors involved, including the owners of critical infrastructure. This could include minimum
performance requirements for counter-drone systems, harmonised terminology and taxonomy,
integrated monitoring, support the incident reporting platform, and incentives for
standardisation. It should provide a baseline level of resilience for Member States and be
implemented in complementarity with the framework for legitimate use of drones. To that end,
the Commission will launch a feasibility study on possible options for establishing an EU level
counter-drone regulatory framework by 2030. In parallel, to meet short-term needs, the
Commission will issue a Recommendation on countering threats posed by drones, detailing
guidance for law enforcement operators.




                                               16

EN                                                                                       EN
 Key actions on response:
 As a matter of urgency, the Commission, together with Member States will:
     •   Launch by Q2 2026 a call for Expression of Interest to establish a voluntary EU
         counter-drone deployment initiative for critical infrastructure based on:
            o An overview of EU dual use counter-drone capability needs.
            o a joint development pilot programme for counter-drone capacities.
            o Voluntary joint purchasing for the protection of critical infrastructure.
            o Deploying Counter-drone capacities in maritime and land border (through the
               €250m call on expression of interest under the BMVI).

     •   As part of the ongoing rollout of AI Gigafactories, support home grown, dual use
         and AI-Powered C2 capacities for autonomous assets with the view to deploy
         sovereign software solutions.

     •   Launch a yearly EU large-scale drone security/blueprint exercise to testcross
         border cooperation and civilian/military synergies (first exercise in autumn 2026).


 The Commission will follow up with Member States to:
     •   Launch a feasibility study for an EU level counter-drone regulatory framework
         setting a common minimum baseline for Member State authorities, and private
         operators of critical infrastructure.

     •   Adopt a Commission Recommendation on countering threats posed by drones
         for law enforcement operators.

     •   Support Frontex in using drones for enhanced border surveillance purposes
         through joint operations, drone and counter-drone pilots and live demos.

     •   Explore by Q4 2026 the establishment of Rapid Counter-drone emergency teams
         to enhance the solidarity and mutual assistance against drone threats.

     •   Encourage Member States to develop the right legal framework in place to allow
         to take efficient remedial measures, including take downs, against drone threats and
         empowering private critical infrastructure owners to take the necessary measures.


   5. Strengthening Europe’s defence readiness against drone threats
Beyond enhancing EU’s resilience to the wide arrays of drone threats, there is also a need to
further strengthen Europe’s defence readiness to counter drone threats considering that the use
of drones has become an integral part of modern warfare. In this context, Europe is drawing
lessons from the unprovoked war in Ukraine, as well from the innovative ecosystem that was
put in place to rapidly adjust to the dynamics of the battlefield.
From a defence perspective, the increasing use of drones and counter-drone systems reflects
broader evolutions in the security environment, including faster operational tempos, activities
below the threshold of armed conflict and the growing interaction between civilian and military
domains. These developments affect not only the conduct of military operations, but also wider
                                              17

EN                                                                                     EN
considerations related to territorial protection, securing critical assets and overall defence
readiness.
Drones are employed across a wide range of military functions, including intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance, strike, force protection and logistical support. At the same
time, counter-drone capabilities have become an integral element of force survivability and
freedom of manoeuvre, particularly in contested and saturated environments.
Drones and counter-drone systems are one of the capability priority areas identified and agreed
by Member States. The Defence Readiness Roadmap has underlined the need to address this
capability as a matter of priority. Lead nations and other Member States, with the support of
the High Representative, notably through active coordination role of the EDA, have already
started work on drones and counter-drones within a dedicated Priority Capability Area (PCA)
to address very specific capability shortfalls. Other adjacent capabilities are addressed in
capability areas such as Air and Missile Defence, Artillery, Electronic Warfare and Artificial
Intelligence. This coordination group provides the framework within which the
interdependencies as well as interoperability challenges and operational dependencies can be
jointly addressed. It should serve as the main vehicle to coordinate Member States’ efforts
towards agreed Defence Readiness objectives, including by connecting capability priorities
with relevant industrial support instruments.
Regarding financial support, the PCA on drones and counter-drones is aiming at procuring and
fostering European industrial capacity in airborne drones through specific objectives and
timelines and leveraging the European Defence Industry Programme (EDIP) and the SAFE
Instrument. The Commission will intensify its support to this, including through EDIP’s
collaborative frameworks (Structure for European Armament Programme- SEAP, European
Defence Project of Common Interest - EDPCI), facilitating dialogue with the Drone Alliance
and performing industrial mapping in coherence with the actions described earlier. This work
will feed into the European Drone Defence Initiative, as well as the Eastern Flank Watch
initiative, proposed in the Defence Readiness Roadmap.
The Commission and the High Representative will take forward the European Drone Defence
Initiative, with a view to supporting coherence across capability, operational and industrial
efforts at EU level, towards achieving the Defence Readiness priorities, including across civil,
dual-use and military strands, and in a cross-cutting manner with ongoing work under relevant
PCA coalition efforts.
This work will draw notably on Ukraine’s battlefield experience in areas of interoperable data
management systems, including Command and Control (integration), detection systems
(awareness) and cost-effective effector systems (response). The European Drone Defence
Initiative should support a more integrated approach, taking into account key operational
dependencies across the full operational response chain. It will aim at building an industrial
ecosystem of end-users, innovators, and production lines able to deliver when necessary.
Countering attack of swarms of drones requires a modular and interoperable systems, based on
an open architecture. Such systems are also instrumental to perform countering strikes in the
depth. Strong synergies with the development of dual use C2 systems for the protection of
critical infrastructure should be leveraged. This will also contribute to the Eastern Flank
Watch initiative in domains, such as building of an industrial base for drone and counter-drone
capabilities, air and missile defence, early warning, C2 and data management, detection and
situational awareness capabilities, kinetic and non-kinetic, as well as Electronic Warfare (EW)
effectors.


                                              18

EN                                                                                      EN
Efforts at European level should lead to a comprehensive European drone and counter-
drone capability and offer a multi-layered and multilevel overarching approach, able to link
sensors and effectors across the Union, to support decision-making processes and to guarantee
continuous situational awareness.
Being able to accelerate the development of increasingly advanced drone and counter-drone
defence capabilities is an integral part of defence readiness of Europe. So far, a total of EUR 1
billion from the European Defence Fund (EDF) and its precursor programmes have been
dedicated to a wide range of drone-related research and development actions. The EU plans to
continue investing into drones and counter-drone technologies over the next 2 years, with
EUR 200 million foreseen under the EDF.

Moreover, EU Member States are about to invest significantly to purchase the latest drones and
counter-drone weapon systems through the SAFE instrument. This will enhance EU border
security, military readiness, and strategic autonomy in systems that are optionally manned,
while boosting the defence technological and industrial base and reducing dependence on non-
EU suppliers.
The EU will also accelerate the development of innovative and disruptive players in the field
of drones and counter-drones for defence. With the upcoming AGILE initiative, the
Commission will propose a new instrument in support of agile and rapid innovation of cost-
efficient defence products and technologies for armed forces. The BraveTechEU initiative is
also expected to include actions aimed at rapid innovation of counter-drone solutions in
response to real operational needs agreed with Ukraine, taken forward together with the EDA.
The Commission is also facilitating access to capital (equities) for such companies, that will
benefit from the EUR 1 billion fund of fund under creation with the EIB/EIF. Furthermore, as
announced in the EU Defence Industry Transformation Roadmap, the Commission will launch
EUDIS Tech Alliances, setting up a network of defence startup/scaleups and armed forces
around priority capability areas. This will help companies to better address Member States’
needs. One of these Tech Alliances will be on drones.

Member States need also to invest into massification of production capacity for drones and
counter-drone systems, in the same way it is done for Ammunition, either to actively deploy
them now or to stock-pile them as strategic reserve. In this vein, and upon agreement of Member
States, EDIP will provide support to drone and counter-drone industrial production capacities,
which will work in synergies with the civilian equivalent initiative. As part of this work, there
is a need to secure access to critical raw materials for the drone industry through research into
alternatives or through stockpiling where necessary. Additionally, the Commission will
prioritise the implementation of EU Defence Industry Transformation Roadmap in building
drone defence capabilities. Beyond 2027, the defence, resilience, security, and space window
of the European Competitiveness Fund (ECF), in synergies with other windows, will offer a
stable and predictable framework, and flexibility to respond to emerging priorities.

Finally, to enhance the cooperation with Ukraine, the Commission is establishing a Drone
Alliance with Ukraine as announced in the Defence Readiness Roadmap. This Alliance will
bring together system producers start-ups/scale-ups and a community of innovators to build on
Ukraine’s experience and industrial basis. It will interact with end-users, including from
Ukraine, so that it can provide rapid solutions and leverage battle proven solutions. It will also
facilitate the work on standardisation, certification and interoperability. It will contribute to
establishing of joint ventures and public-private partnerships in EU and Ukraine. The Drone
Alliance board will coordinate actions with the Member States and industry representatives.
The Alliance will work in full synergy with the Drone Industrial Forum D-TEC. Where relevant
                                               19

EN                                                                                        EN
the Drone Alliance will build on network, knowledge, and partnerships generated by the
Ukraine Investment Framework and broader EU-Ukraine Partnership.

In parallel, enhanced EU-Ukraine cooperation on supply-chain securitisation and
diversification will be essential to overcome bottlenecks in drone production, particularly to
ensure surge capacity and availability of critical electronic components. This will be taken
forward notably in the context of the EU-Ukraine Task Force on Defence Industrial
cooperation.

The European Union should also, through the full range of relevant instruments and initiatives
(including exploring use of EPF and EUMAM), incentivise and support exchanges and
training programmes between Ukraine and Member States for drone pilots, engineers
and maintenance specialists.

 Key actions on defence readiness
 As a matter of priority, the Commission and the High Representative within their respective
 prerogatives, will:
     •   Intensify its support to Member States in the Priority Capability Area Drone
         and Counter-Drone, including through fostering convergence and synergies across
         PCA’s coalition work and related ongoing capability efforts as well as through tools
         such as the EDPCI and SEAP. Such efforts will frame the European Defence Drone
         Initiative, and the Eastern Flank Watch initiative.

     •   Support the rapid industrialisation of drone / counter-drone solutions for defence
         purposes.

     •   Launch the Drone Alliance Initiative with Ukraine to incentivise the creation of
         an innovative industrial ecosystem.

     •   Incentivise and support exchanges and training programmes between Ukraine and
         Member States for drone pilots, engineers and maintenance specialists.
     •

   6. International Cooperation

Enhancing the EU’s security against drone threats can only be envisaged in a broader context
and through cooperation with partners. Cooperation with Ukraine is central to this Action Plan.
Many of the actions envisaged will be implemented as part of an intense partnership with
Ukraine and across all the strands, which would benefit both Ukraine and the EU.

The Action Plan will open dedicated cooperation with close neighbours, such as the UK,
Norway, Switzerland, Iceland, as well as Moldova, the partners in the Western Balkans, in the
Mediterranean , the Black Sea region and other partners with which EU’s security and defence
interests converge, recognising the fact that the EU’s partners are subject to the same kind of
drone threats. The EU has strong interest in establishing necessary cooperation mechanisms
with partners, especially as there may be cross-border considerations in the protection of critical
infrastructures. There is particularly a need to envisage mechanism of early alerts between
partners when a threat is detected.

                                                20

EN                                                                                         EN
A strong EU-NATO cooperation on drones and counter-drone measures is essential for the
rapid and efficient delivery of the Action Plan. The Commission and the High Representative
will engage in regular and structured exchanges with NATO in order to identify mutual
integration of potential dual-use counter-drone solutions, to avoid duplication and maximise
synergies.


   7. Conclusion

The EU must take swift and decisive action to set a powerful example of solidarity and unity.
The measures laid down in this Action Plan are designed as the EU level contribution to bring
immediate and short-term responses to the continuum of threats from drones the EU is facing.
The Action Plan sets a holistic approach by addressing the question of the protection of critical
infrastructure, external borders, as well as proposing to adapt the necessary legislation to
enhance the security from drones and deploy the latest technological evolution to increase
detection and improve response.

The Action Plan should be seen as a dynamic process, to be adapted according to the evolution
and nature of the threats. The Actions put forward are proposals to Member States for enhanced
joint action and cooperation, based on the principle of co-ownership, to address the entire scope
of the issue. Following adoption of this Action Plan, the Commission intends to launch an
intense and structured discussion on all the proposed actions with interested parties, including
the industry, the European Parliament and the Member States to establish a clear prioritisation
of the actions.

To that end, the Commission will consider setting up with Member States a strategic mechanism
to coordinate the implementation of the measures proposed in this Action Plan, connecting the
different dimensions, and ensuring close cooperation with the Council. In view of this, the
Commission invites Member States to nominate a National Drone Security Coordinator,
whose role will be to oversee, foster and promote the national implementation of this Action
Plan. Such mechanism should be without prejudice to the existing technical cooperation
platforms in this area. The Commission will publish a yearly census report based on voluntary
contributions from Member States to monitor implementation of the Action Plan.




                                               21

EN                                                                                       EN
