EU-SOCTA
2025
 EUROPEAN UNION
 SERIOUS AND
O RGANISED CRIME
T HREAT ASSESSMENT
                                                               The changing
                                                              DNA of 
                                                               serious and
                                                              organised crime


                                                                   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




       The EU-SOCTA serves as Europol’s flagship threat assessment, offering in-depth insights into
       the future threats posed by serious and organised crime within the EU. Europol plays a pivotal
       role in providing national law enforcement agencies and partners with critical intelligence
       on emerging threats, enabling stakeholders to better anticipate and prepare for future
       challenges. This strengthens law enforcement’s ability to respond effectively to the evolving
       risks associated with organised crime.

       Building upon previous editions of the EU-SOCTA—produced in 2013, 2017, and 2021—
       this fourth edition continues to build on the foundation of collaborative, intelligence-led
       approaches to combatting serious and organised crime. However, this edition of the EU-
       SOCTA stands as the most comprehensive, forward-looking analysis to date. It is underpinned
       by intelligence gathered from thousands of law enforcement investigations supported by
       Europol each year, complemented by strategic insights from law enforcement experts,
       contributions from other EU agencies and international organisations, private-sector data
       from Europol’s Advisory Groups, and reflections from our Academic Advisory Group. This
       integration of diverse sources of information makes this report unique in its ability to provide
       a thorough forward-looking threat assessment of organised crime in the EU.

       The EU-SOCTA re-emphasises that the threat of serious and organised crime to the EU and
       its Member States is pervasive, serious, and changing in fundamental ways. All criminal
       phenomena represent a threat to the EU, but some stand out as key threats, due to various
       features that make them more threatening. It is Europol’s role, through the EU-SOCTA, to
       identify those key threats.




  1
A FUNDAMENTAL SHIFT IN THE
BLUEPRINT OF SERIOUS AND
ORGANISED CRIME


The key crime areas that represent the highest
threat level to the EU will be further exacerbated by
the changing DNA of serious and organised crime.
What stands out today, and will take even more
prominence tomorrow, is how serious and organised
crime is progressively destabilising, increasingly
nurtured online, and strongly accelerated by Artificial
                                                          Destabilising: Serious and organised
Intelligence (AI) and other new technologies.
                                                          crime has a double destabilising effect on the EU. It
A future-proof fight against serious and organised
                                                          undermines the EU’s economy, rule of law and society
crime must consider this changing blueprint.
                                                          by generating illicit proceeds, spreading violence, and
                                                          normalising corruption. In a concerning development,
                                                          serious and organised crime also increasingly
                                                          destabilises the EU through collaboration between
                                                          criminal networks and hybrid threat actors, leveraging
                                                          each other’s resources, expertise, and protection, to
                                                          each achieve their objectives.
                                                          The line between profit and state-aligned or
                                                          ideological motivations is blurring.




 2
Nurtured online: Crime is increasingly nurtured
online, more specifically by criminal networks’
exploitation of digital and online infrastructure. More
criminal activities are taking place to a larger extent
online, with an increased volume and a wider reach.
The digital space functions as a tool that enables
organised crime, scales up its volume, or disguises
it. Some digital tools, such as dedicated encrypted
communication platforms, are designed by criminals
for other criminals, while other criminal networks
abuse over-the-top communication applications as a
shield against law enforcement.



Accelerated by AI and other new technologies: AI
and other new technologies such as blockchain
or quantum computing will accelerate serious and
organised crime in line with their rapid development.
They are a catalyst for crime, and drive criminal
operations’ efficiency by amplifying their speed,
reach, and sophistication.
IDENTIFYING KEY THREATS

The key threats to the EU’s internal security are infused with this changing DNA in varying ways.
They stand out because of the threat they pose and the impact they have on the EU and its
Member States today, and the way they are expected to evolve tomorrow.

The key threats include crime areas which predominantly take place in the digital and online
realm, but also more traditional crime areas entailing physical trafficking and illicit cross-border
activity. With their point of gravity mostly in the physical world, parts of these criminal activities’
processes are shifting more to the online domain, particularly when it comes to recruitment,
communication, marketing or retail activities. Relevant use cases of AI are also on the horizon.

The key threats identified on the basis of the EU-SOCTA methodology include the following seven
crime areas: cyber-attacks, online fraud schemes, (online) child sexual exploitation, migrant
smuggling, drug trafficking, firearms trafficking, and waste crime.



↘ Cyber-attacks targeting critical                    ↘ An online fraud epidemic affects
  infrastructure, governments, businesses,              EU citizens, businesses, and public
  and citizens are further proliferating.               institutions alike. The scale, variety,
  They exploit digital infrastructure                   sophistication and reach of online fraud
  vulnerabilities, leverage data for system             schemes is unprecedented. Accelerated
  access and target data for profit. These              by AI aiding social engineering and access
  attacks showcase a combination of                     to data, it is expected to outpace other
  motives of profit and destabilisation, as             types of serious and organised crime.
  they are increasingly state-aligned and
  ideologically motivated. Progress in AI will        ↘ (Online) child sexual exploitation is
  further refine cyber-attacks’ modi operandi           transforming, with generative AI used to
  and target identification.                            produce child sexual abuse material, highly
                                                        secured online communities of offenders,
                                                        and to facilitate the expanding
                                                        online grooming of children.




  3
↘ In migrant smuggling, criminal networks
  smuggle irregular migrants to, via or out of the
  EU, charging disproportionate fees. Hybrid threat
  actors instrumentalising migration flows create
  additional opportunities for migrant smuggling
  criminal networks. These networks are known to
  adapt flexibly in their methods and routes
  and have a total disregard for human dignity.
                                                        ↘ Firearms trafficking is shaped by a complex
  Migrant smuggling networks increasingly rely on
                                                          supply and demand interplay, and contributes to
  online platforms for marketing, recruitment and
                                                          the regional expansion of drug-related violence.
  money transfers.
                                                          Sources of illicit firearms shift and further
                                                          expand under the influence of developments
↘ Drug trafficking is a dynamic crime threat
                                                          in technology, AI, and the online sphere. The
  with high destabilising potential for the EU as
                                                          availability of weapons in (post) crisis and war
  a society, given its association with violence,
                                                          zones in countries in the EU neighbourhood and
  corruption, infiltration in the legal economy, and
                                                          beyond also contributes to this expansion.
  worldwide interconnections. It is highly lucrative
  yet competitive. The trafficking of cocaine and
                                                        ↘ The illicit trafficking of waste is a financially
  synthetic is particularly dynamic, with often
                                                          driven crime that intersects closely with the
  shifting routes, new modi operandi and product
                                                          legitimate waste sector, and that employs experts
  varieties, and a potential displacement of violence
                                                          from the sector. It has a detrimental impact on
  across the EU.
                                                          the natural environment, on the economy, and on
                                                          the health and safety of EU citizens.


                                                        Other crime areas such as; trafficking in human
                                                        beings, wildlife crime, organised property crime,
                                                        intellectual property crime, currency counterfeiting,
                                                        fraud schemes against the financial interest of
                                                        the EU and Member States, and sanctions evasion,
                                                        remain persistent.
CONFRONTING CRIMINAL
NETWORKS’ CROSS-CUTTING
TACTICS

The identified key threats have a number
                                                   Organised crime-related violence is
of elements in common, which sustain
                                                   intensifying in several Member States and
and boost them in varying ways. Law
                                                   spills over into society. This violence moves
enforcement must also integrate these
                                                   and intensifies with criminal markets that
cross-cutting elements when designing
                                                   are prone to competition and conflict.
approaches to fight key criminal threats.
                                                   It is catalysed by online and encrypted
The DNA of serious and organised crime             communication solutions that support
is strongly embedded in criminal networks’         borderless recruitment, communication,
ways of working. Criminal networks find            extortion, and coordination.
opportunities to operate as proxies for
                                                   The criminal exploitation of young
hybrid threat actors in the online realm,
                                                   perpetrators not only damages the fabric of
and turn AI and technology into tools for
                                                   society, but also shields the higher echelons
their criminal use. In addition, criminal
                                                   in criminal networks from identification.
networks integrate a range of beneficial
tactics in their operations.                       These tactics contribute to criminal
                                                   networks’ ability to develop and grow
The nature of money laundering and
                                                   their criminal businesses across borders,
criminal finances continues to evolve.
                                                   increase their profits, and augment their
Criminal networks increasingly invest illicit
                                                   resilience, creating a cycle of reinforcement.
proceeds into a parallel financial system
designed to protect and grow their wealth
acquired from illegal activities. It is shielded
by a digital cloak of online platforms and
emerging technologies such as blockchain,
resulting in a new era of money laundering.

The infiltration of legal business structures
allows organised crime to grow in power
and influence. It supports, disguises, or
facilitates any criminal activity and the
laundering of its proceeds. Legal businesses
in various sectors are misused throughout
the criminal process, and insider threats in
particular are of concern.

Corruption is among the strongest
undermining powers, as it is a crime that
facilitates all other types of organised crime.
It has adapted to the digital environment,
with more targeting of individuals with
access to digital systems.




                                                                                                    4
THE GEOGRAPHY OF                            INTELLIGENCE-LED
CRIMINAL NETWORKS                           PRIORITY SETTING FOR THE
                                            FIGHT AGAINST SERIOUS
Criminal networks and their activities
                                            AND ORGANISED CRIME
are unhindered by borders, be it within
the EU or between the EU and the rest
of the world. For this reason, it is also   Further changes to the DNA of serious
of utmost importance to monitor major       and organised crime – its tools, tactics,
developments, particularly in the EU        and structures – will continue to
neighbourhood but beyond it as well, as     shape the criminal landscape. These
these may present pressing implications     transformations, driven by broader
for criminal networks’ operations and       societal developments, will present new
for the internal security of the EU. As     opportunities and challenges for both
the Russian war of aggression against       criminal networks and law enforcement
Ukraine resulted in some changes, a         alike. The EU-SOCTA serves as a vital
future post-war situation may in turn       tool in identifying these key threats,
also cause relevant shifts in the EU        enabling the EU to take a proactive and
criminal landscape.                         targeted approach to combatting serious
                                            and organised crime. By understanding
                                            the shifting blueprint of crime, law
                                            enforcement can anticipate future
                                            threats, refine their strategies, and stay
                                            ahead in the ongoing fight against serious
                                            and organised crime.
THE CHANGING D NA OF S
                       ERIOUS AND O RGANISED CRIME
- EUROPEAN UNION SERIOUS AND O   RGANISED CRIME T
                                                  HREAT
ASSESSMENT, 2025 - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


PDF | ISBN 978-92-9414-008-1 | DOI-10.2813/8524220 | QL-01-25-008-EN-N
© European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation, 2025

This executive summary has been translated for convenience purposes.
Please note that the English version serves as the official reference.

Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

For any use or reproduction of photos or other material that is not under the
copyright of the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation,
permission must be sought directly from the copyright holders.

Cite this publication: Europol, The changing DNA of s
                                                      erious and o
                                                                   rganised crime -
European Union Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment 2025,
- Executive summary, Publications Office of the European Union,
Luxembourg, 2025.

The full report can be accessed on the Europol website:
www.europol.europa.eu
Europol is the EU’s law enforcement agency, supporting the 27 EU Member States
in their fight against serious international crime and terrorism. Europol also
works closely with non-EU partner countries, other EU agencies and international
organisations, strengthening global security through intelligence-sharing
and operational cooperation. Europol is at the heart of the European security
architecture and offers a unique range of services. It acts as an expert centre for
law enforcement operations, a hub for information on criminal activities, and a
centre of law enforcement expertise. Analysis is at the core of Europol’s activities,
with the agency producing regular assessments that offer comprehensive, forward-
looking insights into serious and organised crime and terrorism in the EU.
The European Union Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment (EU-
SOCTA) is the most detailed and forward-looking study of its kind and a product
of systematic and comprehensive analysis of law enforcement information on
serious and organised crime affecting the EU. The EU-SOCTA is designed to
assist decision-makers in the prioritisation of serious and organised crime threats
for the upcoming years. It has been produced by Europol, drawing on data from
investigations Europol is supporting and extensive contributions from all partners.




    Your feedback matters.
    By scanning the embedded QR code you can fill in a short user
    survey on the received strategic report.
    Your input will help us further improve our products.
    https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/eus_strategic_reports
