                                                                                        Europol Public Information




EUROPEAN UNION TERRORISM SITUATION AND TREND REPORT 202 6


PDF Web | ISBN 978-92-9414-099-9| ISSN 2363-0876| DOI: 10.2813/5264545 | QL-01-26-007-EN-N

Neither the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol)
nor any person acting on behalf of the agency is responsible for the use that might be made
of the following information.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2026

© European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation, 2026

Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

For any use or reproduction of photos or other material that is not under the copyright of Europol,
permission must be sought directly from the copyright holders.

While best efforts have been made to trace and acknowledge all copyright holders, Europol
would like to apologise should there have been any errors or omissions. Please do contact us
if you possess any further information relating to the images published or their rights holder.


Cite this publication: Europol, European Union Terrorism Situation and Trend Report, Publications
Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2026.

This publication and more information on Europol are available on the Internet.
www.europol.europa.eu




                                                                                                                2
                                                     Europol Public Information




TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION                                                                 5

KEY FINDINGS                                                                 6

DEVELOPMENTS                                                                 7
Ideological diversity driving terrorism and violent extremism                8
An instrumental online environment                                         10
Achieving impact through versatile modi operandi                           12
Ongoing geopolitical dynamics affecting EU internal security               14

TERRORISM IN EUROPE IN 2025: OVERVIEW                                      17

JIHADIST TERRORISM                                                         26

RIGHT-WING TERRORISM AND VIOLENT EXTREMISM                                 31

LEFT-WING AND ANARCHIST TERRORISM
AND VIOLENT EXTREMISM                                                      35

ETHNO-NATIONALIST AND SEPARATIST TERRORISM
AND VIOLENT EXTREMISM                                                      40

OUTLOOK                                                                    44

ANNEXES                                                                    47

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS                                                      57




                                                                             3
Europol Public Information




                        4
                                                                                   Europol Public Information



   INTRODUCTION
   The European Union Terrorism Situation and Trend Report (EU TE-SAT) 2026 is a situational
   overview that describes major developments, presents consolidated figures on the terrorism
   landscape in the EU in 2025, and elaborates on various forms of terrorism motivated by different
   ideologies1.

   This annual flagship report is based on both qualitative and quantitative information provided by
   Member States on terrorist attacks and on arrests, convictions and penalties for terrorist
   offences. Furthermore, Europol’s cooperation partners provided valuable qualitative information
   that helped contextualise developments outside the EU that may influence the security of the EU
   and its citizens. Information on convictions and penalties for terrorist offences, as well as on
   amendments to national counter-terrorism legislation, was provided by Eurojust, the European
   Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation.

   According to Directive (EU) 2017/541 on combating terrorism2, which Member States had an
   obligation to transpose into their national legislation by 8 September 2018 3, terrorist offences are
   “intentional criminal acts” that are listed in the Directive “which, given their nature or context,
   may seriously damage a country or an international organisation” and are carried out with the
   aim of “seriously intimidating a population, unduly compelling a government or an international
   organisation to perform or abstain from performing any act,” or “seriously destabilising or
   destroying the fundamental political, constitutional, economic or social structures of a country or
   an international organisation”.

   By providing a harmonised definition of terrorist offences, the Directive establishes an EU-wide
   benchmark concerning the definitions of offences and related sanctions in the area of counter
   terrorism. National legislation relating to terrorism may differ among Member States, as the
   framework established by the Directive sets out minimum rules on the definitions of terrorist
   offences, offences relating to a terrorist group and offences related to terrorist activities, and
   sanctions. Consequently, the statistical data and analyses presented in the EU TE-SAT reflect the
   classification of cases as terrorist offences by Member States under their national legislation.

   While the primary scope of the EU TE-SAT is to present the situational picture on terrorism, the
   report also includes descriptions of violent extremist incidents 4, acts, activities and developments
   reported by the Member States5. While the quantitative overview of terrorist attacks, arrests,
   convictions and penalties does not include instances of violent extremism, the latter are included
   for contextualisation purposes and to provide a more comprehensive picture of the security
   threats to the EU.



1 The EU TE-SAT identifies and elaborates on jihadist, right-wing, left-wing and anarchist, and ethno-nationalist

and separatist terrorism. While the categorisation of different types of terrorism based on ideology becomes
increasingly complex, it serves the report’s needs to systematically structure and analyse information from
Member States. This categorisation does not hold any legal or formal value.
2 Directive (EU) 2017/541 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2017 on combating

terrorism and replacing Council Framework Decision 2002/475/JHA and amending Council Decision
2005/671/JHA, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2017/541/oj/eng.
3 Not all Member States were obliged to transpose the Directive into their national legislation. Ireland and

Denmark did not, due to respective protocols (Protocols 21 and 22 to the TEU and TFEU).
4 When the report refers to “extremist,” it specifically means “violent extremist.” The shortened wording is

used to improve readability.
5 There is no legal definition of violent extremism at EU level.


                                                                                                                5
                                                                    Europol Public Information



KEY FINDINGS
 ► In 2025, 45 terrorist attacks were reported by 10 Member States, while 486 suspects
   were arrested for terrorism-related offences across 21 Member States. Jihadism
   accounted for 24 of the reported attacks and 347 of the reported arrests.

 ►    The terrorism threat remains high. Established terrorist and violent extremist ideologies
     (jihadism, right-wing, left-wing and anarchist, and ethno-nationalist terrorism) persisted,
     while the threat landscape was further complicated by destabilising ideological currents,
     blurred ideological boundaries, and other forms of violence.

 ► Most terrorist attacks and plots involved lone actors or small, self-initiated cells, using
   relatively simple attack methods. However, terrorist and violent extremist actors were
   able to exploit a range of operational opportunities. This further complicated the nature
   and possible manifestation of the threat.


 ► A complex and shifting geopolitical context continued to fuel extremist narratives,
   thereby acting as drivers of radicalisation and recruitment across ideologies. This
   contributed to threats directed at specific communities (e.g. Jewish or Muslim) within
   the EU, while ongoing conflicts also increased uncertainty regarding the movements and
   intentions of radicalised individuals.


 ► The online environment enabled rapid, widespread, and often secure access to a wide
   range of terrorist and extremist beliefs and actors. This accelerated exposure to terrorist
   and violent extremist content and facilitated radicalisation processes, but also allowed
   for enhanced operational coordination.




                                                                                               6
               Europol Public Information



DEVELOPMENTS




                                       7
                                                                            Europol Public Information


  Ideological diversity driving terrorism and violent
  extremism
  A significant proportion of terrorist attacks and arrests were either claimed by or readily
  attributed to perpetrators adhering to jihadism. These were followed by other established
  terrorist ideologies, including right-wing, left-wing and anarchist, and ethno-nationalist terrorism.
  While individual motivations varied, terrorist offences were generally shaped by coherent and
  long-standing ideological frameworks.

  However, alongside these established ideologies, other belief systems that explicitly seek to
  cause destabilisation also contributed to terrorism-related incidents within the EU, while the
  boundaries between previously distinct terrorist ideologies and other forms of violence became
  more difficult to discern.



  Destabilising ideologies
  Anti-institutional groups contested democratic bodies and the rule of law in several Member
  States. Often drawing on conspiracy narratives and disinformation, they were driven by a distrust
  of political and societal elites and influenced by various extremist beliefs, including elements
  associated with right-wing terrorism and violent extremism. While not all actors in this milieu had
  terrorist intent, the narratives and echo chambers in which they operated led to further
  radicalisation and lowered the threshold for violence.

  Hybrid threat actors also continued efforts to instrumentalise proxies to commit terrorist
  offences. These offences are part of a larger strategic objective of destabilisation that involves
  persistent, targeted and cumulative disruptions rather than a single, overwhelming attack 6. Not
  all criminal acts committed within this context are necessarily categorised as terrorism.
  Additionally, proxies may be unaware of these strategic objectives and can be treated as
  expendable.

  Nihilistic violent extremism was another increasingly visible development 7. Perpetrators often
  emerged from decentralised digital communities that glorify online and offline violent activities,
  but lack clear and coherent ideological objectives. Embedded within a broader criminal
  ecosystem, some individuals were driven by violence for its own sake or by other criminal goals.
  Others, however, deliberately sought to promote chaos and accelerate what they viewed as the
  collapse of the existing social order. Individuals or subgroups in this ecosystem could be
  vulnerable to exploitation by malicious actors seeking to advance their strategic goals.




6 Europol 2025, EU Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment (EU-SOCTA 2025):

https://www.europol.europa.eu/cms/sites/default/files/documents/EU-SOCTA-2025.pdf.
7 There is no agreed definition of nihilistic violent extremism at EU level.


                                                                                                       8
                                                                                  Europol Public Information



    The Com network

    The Com network is a decentralised online ecosystem, formed by overlapping digital spaces and
    groups that promote or engage in deviant or extremely violent behaviour8. While its configuration
    is fluid and continuously reshaped through fragmentation and reconfiguration, three principal
    branches can generally be distinguished: Cyber Com, (S)extortion Com, and Offline Com.

    Cyber Com is focused on activities such as Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, doxing,
    swatting and ransomware attacks. (S)extortion Com groups groom and extort mostly underage
    female victims for so-called “bloodsigns”, “cutsigns” and sexual acts. These acts are recorded and
    used to further extort the victims to commit increasingly violent or humiliating acts. Offline Com
    groups are mostly focused on committing attacks in real life, such as arson, stabbings or murders.

    No single ideology dominates this space and members often lack a coherent or clear goal. The
    pursuit of status and recognition is often a key driver, but a mix of other motivations also shape
    these actors’ actions, including an attraction to sexual or other forms of violence, nihilism,
    misanthropy, satanism, misogyny, or elements of jihadist or right-wing terrorism and violent
    extremism. While the purpose and modi operandi vary, some subgroups and individuals within
    this ecosystem specifically seek to destabilise societal structures.

    Outside the EU, some subgroups linked to The Com network were designated as terrorist
    organisations in 20259. Within the EU, several Member States were closely monitoring the
    phenomenon and have classified some incidents, such as incitement of violent behaviour, as
    terrorist offences. However, other violent acts linked to this ecosystem may not have been
    recognised as terrorist offences or did not meet the relevant national legal thresholds, and were
    instead considered another form of criminality or addressed as public order offences10.




   Blurring boundaries of ideologies
   Rather than strict adherence to a single ideological doctrine, numerous acts of violence were
   driven by a heterogenous set of beliefs and influences. The boundaries between different
   terrorist ideologies and other forms of violence were increasingly blurred. This was particularly
   visible in the context of jihadist and right-wing terrorism and violent extremism.

   In the area of right-wing terrorism and violent extremism, long-standing narratives such as neo-
   Nazism, neo-fascism, white supremacism, anti-Semitism and anti-migrant sentiment remained
   present. However, these narratives were increasingly influenced by accelerationist concepts,
   nihilistic justifications for violence, and other violent subcultures or tactics (e.g. hooligan and
   skinhead subcultures, the manosphere or involuntary celibacy, as well as paedo-hunting). Within
   jihadist spheres, perpetrators also occasionally displayed less ideological depth. They did not



8 Europol 2025, ‘The rise of online cult communities dedicated to extremely violent child abuse’.

https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications-events/publications/rise-of-online-cult-communities-dedicated-
to-extremely-violent-child-abuse
9 The Maniacs Murder Cult and 764 were listed as terrorist organisations by Canada in December 2025. The

Maniacs Murder Cult was listed as terrorist organisation by the UK in June 2025.
10 Coordinated by Europol, Project Compass brings together law enforcement authorities from 28 Member

States and partner countries to combat activities linked to The Com network. More information available at:
https://www.europol.europa.eu/how-we-work/operations/project-compass
                                                                                                              9
                                                                                 Europol Public Information

   necessarily commit themselves to one organisation or ideology, instead sometimes developing a
   fixation with violence per se.

   Shared visual iconography, narratives or targets could bridge the gap between these otherwise
   distinct milieus. Concepts such as “white jihad” exemplified the exchange of ideas between right-
   wing terrorism and jihadism.

   This coincided with the continued trend of young perpetrators’ involvement in terrorism and
   violent extremism, as well as the influence of the online domain. Young radicalised individuals
   often displayed only a superficial understanding of established ideologies, making them
   susceptible to a fluid mix of unstable, fragmented and ambiguous ideas. Personal grievances or
   mental health issues could further increase their vulnerability. Additionally, many terrorist
   incidents had a digital footprint, as the online environment facilitated the rapid and widespread
   dissemination of terrorist and extremist content, as well as mobilisation among young people
   and other at-risk individuals.

      Case example
      On 30 October 2025, in Italy, a 16-year-old was arrested following a prior search that led to
      the retrieval of knives, axes and drawings of swastikas. Investigators also found evidence
      identifying him as the administrator of a messaging app channel where he shared anti-Semitic
      content, among other things, and encouraged violence against Jewish people and foreign
      nationals. He also expressed support for, and glorified, mass-casualty attacks.

   Terrorist and violent extremist actors have frequently exploited and imitated game-design
   principles and other gaming features, including competition, rankings, challenges and reward
   mechanisms. This gamification makes it easier to engage with violent content, contributes to its
   normalisation, and blurs the distinction between online participation and real-world violence11.

   Ideological diversity and perpetrators with fluid or incoherent worldviews are not new
   phenomena, but they featured prominently in the EU terrorism and violent extremism landscape
   in 2025. This increasingly complicated the use of clear-cut labels and made it more challenging to
   provide an exact account of what terrorism in the EU looks like today. Such growing ambiguity
   gives rise to legal, analytical and operational challenges for those tasked with understanding,
   assessing and responding to the phenomenon.



   An instrumental online environment
   In our interconnected world, the online domain is an indispensable facet of everyday life12. Its
   impact on the terrorism and violent extremism landscape within the EU continued to grow, in
   close relationship with such activities carried out offline.

   The broad reach, rapid connectivity and ease of information exchange provided by the online
   environment - combined with its operational security features - were instrumental to terrorist
   and violent extremist actors across ideological spectrums. They leveraged the digital domain to
   reach wide audiences, recruit and mobilise individuals, and facilitate the coordination of both
   online and offline activities.


11 Europol 2025, ‘Europol and partner countries combat online radicalisation on gaming platforms’,

https://www.europol.europa.eu/media-press/newsroom/news/europol-and-partner-countries-combat-online-
radicalisation-gaming-platforms.
12 Europol 2025, EU Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment (EU-SOCTA 2025),

https://www.europol.europa.eu/cms/sites/default/files/documents/EU-SOCTA-2025.pdf
                                                                                                        10
                                                                                    Europol Public Information


   Social media and online services
   Terrorist and violent extremist content appeared across social media and online platforms of all
   sizes, from small forums to very large online platforms13. Algorithm-driven content amplifies the
   reach and visibility of such content, enhancing the ability of terrorist and violent extremist actors
   to engage with a broad population. Young people and vulnerable individuals are particularly
   susceptible to such exposure and influence.

   Content varied widely in tone and severity and often included disinformation and hate speech.
   Borderline content typically served as an easy entry point. Users who demonstrated initial
   interest could be drawn in and, in some cases, would progress to networks that shared explicit
   terrorist and violent extremist material. This escalation in tone usually coincided with a move
   from mainstream platforms to more secure and private ones.

   The style of online propaganda was tailored to specific social media platforms and target
   audiences, such as young users14. For example, users shared mash-ups on vlogging platforms and
   memes and GIFs on image-sharing services. In some instances, user-generated content was
   preferred over official propaganda, as it is harder to detect and remove. Users regularly edited
   and modified branded propaganda to spread it more widely.

       Case example
       On 16 November 2025, in Spain, a 31-year-old woman was arrested on suspicion of
       consuming, editing and disseminating radical and violent material from official jihadist
       propaganda, incorporating it into her own productions for distribution. She maintained ties
       with several convicted jihadists and engaged in significant activity on social media aimed at
       recruiting and indoctrinating individuals for terrorist purposes.

   Audio-based propaganda acted as an additional driver of radicalisation. Compared with videos
   and images, terrorist and violent extremist content on audio-sharing platforms can be
   particularly challenging to detect and moderate. Therefore, audio content played a significant
   role in attracting individuals to terrorist and extremist milieus, shaping perceptions and
   reinforcing narratives and ideologies15.

   Terrorist and violent extremist actors also continued to exploit gaming and gaming-related
   platforms, as well as a range of websites, to disseminate terrorist content, cultivate support
   networks and advance their objectives.

   Beyond propaganda and recruitment purposes, social media and online communication channels
   were also used across ideologies to encourage, facilitate and prepare terrorist offences, for
   example through operational coordination or the sharing of tactics and instructional materials.




13 In 2025, EU Member States competent authorities and Europol assessed 81.862 pieces of online content,

regarding ‘terrorism’, that led to the transmission of 61.412 Referrals to a total of 99 Hosting Service Providers
(HSP). Respectively, regarding ‘racism and xenophobia’, Member States and Europol assessed 7.219 pieces of
online content that led to the transmission of 7.093 Referrals to a total of 22 HSPs.
14 Europol 2025, ‘Europol coordinates operation against terrorist content online targeting minors’,

https://www.europol.europa.eu/media-press/newsroom/news/europol-coordinates-operation-against-
terrorist-content-online-targeting-minors.
15 Europol 2026, ‘Europol coordinates largest referral action targeting terrorist audio propaganda’,

https://www.europol.europa.eu/media-press/newsroom/news/europol-coordinates-largest-referral-action-
targeting-terrorist-audio-propaganda.
                                                                                                                11
                                                                        Europol Public Information


Existing and emerging technologies
Artificial intelligence (AI) was abused by terrorists and violent extremists in several ways. Online
users exploited image, audio and video generators to create and edit propaganda, including
deepfakes, memes and GIFs. Much of the AI-generated material consisted of hate speech and
‘awful but lawful’ content rather than explicit terrorist content, as most AI tools are trained not
to create illegal content. To bypass these safeguards, some users relied on jailbreaking or prompt
engineering techniques. Efforts to circumvent these limitations have been shared and
documented among users.

AI-powered bots and chatbots were also abused. Bots have a limited set of pre-recorded answers
to react to users’ prompts, while chatbots, thanks to large language models (LLMs), process
prompts to provide better contextual answers. They were used to boost recruitment, generate
and share propaganda and, overall, optimise online engagement and promote violent extremist
and terrorist ideologies. Additionally, AI-driven applications were used to conduct preliminary
research to prepare attacks.

Terrorists and violent extremist actors also utilised existing and emerging technologies to varying
degrees to maintain anonymity, avoid being de-platformed or banned, and secure their
communications from law enforcement detection. Users themselves shared instruction materials
on operational and online security.

Specific measures included end-to-end encrypted (E2EE) messaging applications and secure email
services, virtual private networks (VPN), dark web and related browsers, portable operating
systems and anonymity-enhancing platforms. Blockchain-based and decentralised online services
have increasingly been used in recent years. Online users have started favouring social media and
online services based on these technologies because they allow them to ensure continuity in
maintaining a stable network and sharing content. Decentralisation makes it impossible to
remove content as a whole. Thus, users have created backup and dummy channels and aliases
that automatically respawn if any other instance is deleted.



Achieving impact through versatile modi operandi
Terrorism is not always intended to cause large numbers of casualties, but is designed to
generate fear and produce a wider psychological impact.

In 2025, terrorist and violent extremist actors could choose from a range of operational
opportunities, driven by their resources and capacity, organisational constellation and the
objectives they seeked to achieve, to act and generate psychological impact. Different
operational possibilities not only diversify the ways in which threats can manifest, but also lead
to strategic threats, including the gradual erosion of social cohesion and trust within society.



Attack modes
The terrorist and violent extremist landscape in the EU consisted of a mix of isolated individuals,
online communities and physical groups and networks. However, most terrorist attacks and plots
involved lone actors or small, self-initiated cells. They often used simple attack methods, such as
bladed weapons, firearms, vehicle ramming, or arson, directed against soft targets.

Low-complexity attacks may reflect perpetrators’ limited operational experience or the absence
of a network that provides resources or ideological and operational guidance. However, the risk
                                                                                                     12
                                                                              Europol Public Information

  of sophisticated attacks persists. The growing availability of modern technology continued to
  lower the barriers to carrying out sophisticated attacks, even by lone actors or small cells.
  Additionally, some actors may be well-prepared and guided by a clear and coherent ideology, as
  long-standing hierarchical organisations remained active.

      Case example
      On 15 April 2025, in Germany, a 29-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of preparing a
      serious act of violence. Following the Hamas attack on 7 October 2023, he allegedly travelled
      to Lebanon to undergo training in firearms and combat weapons provided by the local
      Hezbollah group. This training took place in the first half of 2024.

  The misuse of explosive materials, especially regulated heavy pyrotechnics, as well as the
  acquisition of military ordnance such as hand grenades, remained a security threat. Attack
  preparations also continued to rely on accessible resources and materials, including online
  manuals and publicly available precursors for homemade explosives.

      Case example
      On 12 September 2025, in Belgium, two young men linked to the so-called Islamic State’s (IS)
      ideology attempted to manufacture explosives in order to attack a prominent public figure.
      Their internet searches to learn how to make these explosives led to their detection.

  At the same time, terrorist and violent extremist actors continued to show an interest in
  innovative attack methods. These included 3D-printed weapons, bladed weapons designed to
  evade metal detection and drones. Wider access to the required materials and technical
  guidance is deemed to have lowered the threshold for would-be perpetrators to explore these
  options16, especially when reinforced by propaganda promoting their use. In 2025, terrorist and
  violent extremist actors regularly featured unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) systems in their
  propaganda.


  Other terrorist offences
  Beyond enabling the execution of terrorist attacks, existing and emerging techniques also
  influenced other terrorism-related offences. This was particularly visible in the context of
  terrorist financing, propaganda and recruitment.

  In the area of terrorist financing, both traditional and newer methods were adopted to collect
  money, including salaries, donations, crowdfunding campaigns, the sale of propaganda material,
  entry fees to events, theft, the sale of illicit goods and the creation of fraudulent NGOs. Funds
  came from both legal and illegal sources. Similarly, a wide range of techniques were used to
  move and store money. Traditional methods included hawala systems and cash couriers, while
  more recent technologies included cryptocurrencies and value transfers via games. Hawala
  service providers are known to have added various online services to their offerings.

  Propaganda and recruitment activities also continued to rely on a mix of traditional and newer
  methods. In-person engagement and the physical dissemination of propaganda remained
  relevant, including through private prayer spaces, music concerts and training clubs and camps.
  At the same time, newer technologies, particularly digital tools, accelerated opportunities to
  produce and distribute content quickly, securely and at a large scale. This sped up short-term



16 See also: Europol, 2025, ‘The Unmanned Future(s): The impact of robotics and unmanned systems on law

enforcement’, https://www.europol.europa.eu/publication-events/main-reports/unmanned-futures.
                                                                                                          13
                                                                                 Europol Public Information

   recruitment and radicalisation, as was illustrated by the growing shift from online activity to real-
   world violence.

   Structural relationships between criminal networks and terrorist actors did not appear
   widespread, but there is a notable overlap in modi operandi, and occasional interactions did
   occur17. Both actors can draw on similar recruitment pools and operational tradecraft,
   infrastructures and tools. This results in a risk of mutual facilitation, service provision, or the use
   of crime-as-a-service for terrorism-related offences. At the same time, in 2025, some terrorist
   actors did at times engage in organised crime activities or cooperate with criminal networks to
   pursue financial or operational objectives, for example through money laundering, weapons
   trafficking or drug trafficking.



   Ongoing geopolitical dynamics affecting EU internal
   security
   Developments outside the EU continued to shape the internal terrorism and violent extremism
   landscape. Ongoing international conflicts and geopolitical developments, notably in the Middle
   East, contributed to radicalisation processes, often by fuelling extremist narratives. They also
   generated threats against specific communities (e.g. Jewish or Muslim) or other targets within
   the EU, while in some cases also raising concerns about potential travel movements and the long-
   term security threat associated with detained or displaced individuals.

   The Hamas attack on 7 October 2023 and the subsequent developments in the region continued
   to impact EU internal security in 2025. The conflict was exploited by terrorists and violent
   extremists across the ideological spectrum, including jihadist, right-wing and left-wing groups. It
   was leveraged to mobilise support and reinforce respective narratives, often containing anti-
   Israel, anti-Semitic or anti-Western elements. In some cases, this contributed to terrorist or other
   violent activities in the EU, including attacks against Jewish targets.



    The ‘axis of resistance’

    Iran has over time developed a network of proxy groups. Key actors include Hezbollah, Hamas, Ansar
    Allah, and multiple militias operating in Iraq and other countries. While tensions and confrontation
    between Israel and Iran-aligned actors predated the Hamas’ terrorist attacks on southern Israel on 7
    October 2023, those attacks significantly exacerbated the conflict and contributed to a sharp escalation
    in hostilities between Israel, Iran and its proxies in the region.

    These developments have generated a steady flow of images and reports of death and destruction.
    Such content has driven - and continues to drive - polarisation in the EU, with anti-Semitism being a
    unifying narrative among diverse terrorist and violent extremist actors. In 2025, this resulted in cases of
    radicalised individuals targeting Jewish interests, and the arrests of individuals based in the EU
    intending to join one of Iran’s proxy groups.

    In parallel, growing pressure on Iran and its proxy network may lead to increased direct threats in the




17 See also: Europol 2026, ‘Decoding the EU’s most threatening criminal networks: Issue 2 – The blueprint of

criminal opportunism’, https://www.europol.europa.eu/publication-events/main-reports/blueprint-of-
criminal-opportunism.
                                                                                                               14
                                                                                  Europol Public Information

    EU. Whereas in the past, including in 2025, these groups mainly used the EU for fundraising and
    logistical support, some may increasingly consider attacks on Jewish, Israeli or other targets in the EU18.

              Case example
              In September 2025 in Austria, a weapons cache was discovered that contained five counterfeit
              pistols and 10 magazines. A 39-year-old with close ties to the Hamas leadership was linked to
              the cache and presumably planned to carry out attacks. On 1 October 2025 in Germany, three
              suspected Hamas members were arrested on suspicion of procuring firearms and ammunition
              in Germany, allegedly intended for attacks on Israeli or Jewish institutions, though no specific
              targets were identified19.

    Direct security risks in the EU linked to developments in the region persisted in 2026, with indications
    that Iranian actors and its proxies, including through criminal networks, were involved in a series of
    incidents across several Member States20.



   Jihadist terrorist organisations retained their intent to increase their presence and capabilities in
   Syria, seeking to exploit the economic, political, and security challenges faced in the region. The
   persistence of radical narratives; some travel movements by individuals with jihadist motivations
   from the EU to Syria; the situation of jihadists who had previously travelled to the region; and the
   presence of incarcerated foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs), women and children, all remained
   significant concerns for multiple Member States in 2025. Additionally, there were ongoing fears
   regarding the potential infiltration of individuals to the EU intent on carrying out violent acts.

   In Africa in 2025, affiliates of IS and Al-Qaeda (AQ) expanded their geographical reach and
   operational capabilities. For example, Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam wa al Muslimin (JNIM) remained
   significant in Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger, but also expanded southwards. In the Sahel, the
   Islamic State Sahel Province (ISSP) grew considerably, expanding territorial control and increasing
   its headcount. At the same time, the Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP) remained highly
   active in the Lake Chad Basin. As parts of the region remained a hotspot for terrorist and violent
   extremist groups, there remained key concerns about its attraction for FTFs and the possibility of
   external operations against the EU.

   Multiple Member States also assessed that jihadist groups in central and eastern Asia,
   particularly the Islamic State Khorasan Province (ISKP), remained resilient and continued to pose
   potential security threats, both in the region and externally.




18 See also, e.g.: Swedish Security Service, ‘Situation assessment 2025-2026’,

https://sakerhetspolisen.se/download/18.6d8b207419df2497fd955/1778075300407/SP_La%CC%88gesbild%2
0ENG_Anpassad.pdf ; Dutch General Intelligence and Security service, ‘Threat Assessment of State Actors
2025’, https://english.aivd.nl/documents/2025/09/26/threat-assessment-of-state-actors-2025;
19 On 25 March 2026, the First Criminal Division of the Berlin Higher Regional Court sentenced four men to

prison sentences for membership in a terrorist organisation, Hamas. Although no concrete plans for attacks on
European soil were established during trial, the court found that Hamas carries out operational activities in
Europe to prepare for possible future attacks on Israeli or Jewish institutions. See:
https://www.berlin.de/gerichte/presse/pressemitteilungen-der-ordentlichen-
gerichtsbarkeit/2026/pressemitteilung.1656226.php.
20 Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) was formally designated a terrorist organisation by the EU on

19 February 2026, under Council Decision (CFSP) 2026/421. Between 13 February 2026 and 28 April 2026,
Europol coordinated an action against terrorist content online linked to the IRGC. See:
https://www.europol.europa.eu/media-press/newsroom/news/eu-targets-iran-revolutionary-guard-
propaganda-ecosystem-in-online-crackdown
                                                                                                             15
                                                                         Europol Public Information

Russia’s ongoing war of aggression against Ukraine continued to feature in terrorist and violent
extremist narratives, particularly within right-wing circles, though it was assessed as being less
prominent than in previous years. The conflict remained a point of ideological divergence, with
some actors portraying Russia positively as an anti-Western power, while others adopted pro-
Ukraine positions. In 2025, concerns persisted that the war could facilitate extremist skill
acquisition, illicit weapons trafficking, the exploitation of migratory flows, and further societal
divisions within the EU.




                                                                                                      16
                    Europol Public Information



TERRORISM IN EUROPE IN 2025:
OVERVIEW




                                           17
                                                                       Europol Public Information




In 2025, 45 terrorist attacks (completed, failed and foiled) were reported by 10 Member States,
of which 22 were completed, 20 were foiled, and 3 failed. The 22 completed attacks overall
resulted in 6 fatalities. This marks a decline from 2024, when 58 attacks were recorded in 14
Member States. These included 34 completed attacks, which resulted in 5 fatalities in 2024.

However, the number of arrests continued to rise, with 486 suspects arrested for terrorism-
related offences across 21 Member States in 2025 (compared to 449 in 2024 and 426 in 2023).
These figures do not account for the larger number of ongoing investigations.

This may reflect the effectiveness of law enforcement efforts, but simultaneously indicates that
the terrorism threat in the EU cannot be assessed solely on the basis of the number of attacks
and arrests, casualty figures or geographical breakdown.




                                                                                                   18
                                                                        Europol Public Information


Attacks




Jihadist terrorism accounted for the largest share of attacks in 2025 (24), representing about half
of all incidents. The same number was recorded in 2024, but more attacks were completed (nine,
compared to six in 2024). The completed attacks occurred in Germany (4), France (2), Austria (1),
Ireland (1) and Spain (1), while 15 were foiled in France (8), Austria (6) and Belgium (1). Jihadist
attacks were the deadliest form of terrorism in 2025, causing five fatalities and injuring 81
people.

Five attacks were labelled right-wing terrorism. One of these five attacks was completed, in
France. Four attacks were foiled, in France (3) and Ireland (1). The one completed attack
classified as terrorism resulted in one fatality.

Left-wing and anarchist terrorism accounted for 12 attacks. 11 completed attacks were carried
out in Italy (10) and Greece (1). One failed attack occurred in Italy. As in previous years, no
victims were reported, as the targets were primarily buildings or vehicles.

No verified terrorist attacks were reported as attributed to ethno-nationalist and separatist
terrorism within the EU in 2025.

Other and not specified forms of terrorism accounted for four attacks. This included one
completed attack in the Netherlands, two failed attacks in Malta (1) and Greece (1), and one
foiled attack in Belgium. Six victims sustained injuries due to reported stabbings.




                                                                                                  19
                                                                                       Europol Public Information


   Terrorist attacks per type of terrorism per Member State, as reported to
   Europol by EU Member States in 2025
                               Jihadist   Right-wing     Left-wing and            Ethno-    Other/not            Total
                                                              anarchist   nationalist and    specified
                                                                               separatist
          Austria                    7              -                 -                 -             -                7
         Belgium                     1              -                 -                 -            1                 2
          France                    10             4                  -                 -             -            14
        Germany                      4              -                 -                 -             -                4
          Greece                      -             -                1                  -            1                 2
          Ireland                    1             1                  -                 -             -                2
             Italy                    -             -               11                  -             -            11
           Malta                      -             -                 -                 -            1                 1
    Netherlands                       -             -                 -                 -            1                 1
            Spain                    1              -                 -                 -             -                1
            Total                   24             5                12                  -            4             45


   Among the 45 completed, failed and foiled attacks, the most common modus operandi was
   stabbing (15), followed by bombing (11), arson (7), shooting (5), damage to property (2) and
   vehicle ramming (1)21.

   Of the 22 completed attacks, the majority were carried out by lone actors (12), who primarily
   opted for a simple and accessible weapon of choice, using a bladed weapon (9), a firearm (1), a
   vehicle (1) and an improvised incendiary device (IID) (1).

   Civilians were most frequently targeted, largely among attacks attributed to jihadist terrorism,
   right-wing terrorism and other forms of terrorism. Law enforcement headquarters and officers
   were another common target, among jihadists and left-wing and anarchist terrorists. Private
   businesses linked to the industrial, financial, tourism and wellness sectors, were exclusively
   targeted by left-wing and anarchist assailants, who often cited the companies’ relations with
   Israel as the motivating factor for the attack22.




21 The modus operandi was not specified for four attacks.

22 Other targets included religious, public administration, education, military, political, critical infrastructure,

medi and not specified targets.
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                             Europol Public Information


   Arrests




   347 individuals were arrested for jihadist terrorism-related offences in 16 Member States,
   thereby regaining at a similar level to 2023 (334), following a decrease in 2024 (289). The highest
   number of arrests occurred in Spain (100) and France (64). Most arrests were on suspicion of
   terrorist propaganda (91), membership (73), and preparation of a terrorist attack (53), followed
   by participation in the activities of a terrorist organisation (40), incitement and making threats
   (26), travel (15), financing (12), committing an attack (11), (self) training (7), possession of
   facilitating items (6), recruitment (5) and other facilitation activities (2)23.

   There were 43 arrests attributed to right-wing terrorism in nine Member States, namely Germany
   (8), the Netherlands (8), Belgium (5), France (5), Poland (4), Portugal (4), Ireland (3), Italy (3) and
   Spain (3). The most common offence was incitement and making threats (13), followed by arrests
   on suspicion of membership (12), planning or preparing an attack (9), participation in the
   activities of a terrorist organisation (4), committing an attack (1), financing (1), and possession of
   facilitating items (1)24.

   13 individuals were arrested in six Member States on suspicion of left-wing and anarchist
   terrorist offences. Most of these arrests took place in Italy (6), followed by Spain (2), France (2),
   Belgium (1), Greece (1) and the Netherlands (1). In five cases, the suspected offence was
   committing an attack, followed by membership (4), incitement and making threats (2), terrorist
   propaganda (1), and participation in the activities of a terrorist organisation (1).

   There were 34 arrests for ethno-nationalist and separatist terrorist offences reported by six
   Member States: Italy (13), France (7), Germany (5), Ireland (4), Finland (3) and Spain (2). The


23 Six arrests reported by the Member States did not specify the offence.

24 Two arrests reported by the Member States did not specify the offence.


                                                                                                           21
                                                                                    Europol Public Information

   suspected offences were membership (16), financing (10), committing an attack (7) and terrorist
   propaganda (1).

   49 individuals were arrested for other and not specified forms of terrorism25. Arrests occurred in
   nine Member States, namely the Netherlands (14), Spain (10), Belgium (8), France (6), Germany
   (3), Poland (3), Lithuania (3), Luxembourg (1) and Malta (1). Most arrests were on suspicion of
   participation in the activities of a terrorist organisation (9), incitement and making threats (8) and
   other facilitation activities (8), followed by committing an attack (6), planning or preparing an
   attack (4), terrorist propaganda (4), membership (3), possession of facilitating items (3) and self-
   training (1)26.



   Arrests for terrorist offences per type of terrorism per Member State, as
   reported to Europol by Member States in 2025

                             JihadisT   Right-wing    Left-wing and    Ethno-Nationalist    Other/not    Total
                                                           anarchist      and separatist     specified
          Austria                 40              -                -                    -            -     40
         Belgium                  30             5                1                     -           8      44
           Cyprus                  1              -                -                    -            -      1
          Czechia                  6              -                -                    -            -      6
        Denmark                    5              -                -                    -            -      5
          Estonia                  1              -                -                    -            -      1
          Finland                   -             -                -                    3            -      3
           France                 64             5                2                     7           6      84
        Germany                   21             8                 -                    5           3      37
          Greece                    -             -               1                     -            -      1
          Ireland                  4             3                 -                    4            -     11
             Italy                26             3                6                  13              -     48
        Lithuania                   -             -                -                    -           3       3
     Luxembourg                     -             -                -                    -           1       1
            Malta                   -             -                -                    -           1       1
     Netherlands                  40             8                1                     -          14      63
           Poland                  2             4                 -                    -           3       9
         Portugal                  1             4                 -                    -            -      5
         Romania                   3              -                -                    -            -      3
            Spain               100              3                2                     2          10    117
         Sweden                    3              -                -                    -            -      3
            Total               347             43               13                  34            49    486



   259 of the 398 individuals arrested for terrorism-related offences whose residence status was
   known were EU citizens, while 139 were non-EU citizens27. The majority of arrested suspects
   were male (436)28, with 47 female suspects arrested primarily for jihadist offences29.


25 Other forms of terrorism = 36. Not specified forms of terrorism = 13.

26 Three arrests reported by the Member States did not specify the offence.

27 The residential status of 88 individuals was not specified.

28 The gender of 3 out of the 486 individuals arrested was not reported.

29 43 of the 47 female suspects were arrested in association with jihadist terrorism.


                                                                                                            22
                                                                                     Europol Public Information

      The average age of the reported individuals arrested in 2025 was 27 years old, with 130 reported
      individuals being 18 or younger30. The youngest person arrested was 12 years old and linked to
      right-wing terrorism. The oldest arrestee was 79 years old and linked to left-wing and anarchist
      terrorism.



      Convictions and penalties
      21 Member States contributed court proceedings for terrorist offences that were concluded in
      2025 to Eurojust31. These court proceedings resulted in 406 convictions and 99 acquittals for
      terrorist offences.

      Number of convictions and acquittals for terrorist offences in 2023, 2024 and
      2025, as reported to Eurojust
                                                          2023                     2024                      2025
       Convictions                                          290                      426                      406
       Acquittals                                            68                       59                       99
       Total                                                358                      485                      505


      Some convictions and acquittals in 2025 are final, while others are pending, as appeals have been
      submitted by the prosecution, the defence or both32. In several cases, the persons convicted of
      terrorism in 2025 had previously been convicted of terrorism or other offences in the same
      Member State or abroad.



Type of offences in the concluded court proceedings
      A large proportion of the concluded court proceedings concerned membership or participation in
      (the activities of), or collaboration with, a terrorist group, terrorist financing, (attempted)
      terrorist attacks, or preparation for such attacks. Other offences included murder in a terrorist
      context, (self)-indoctrination, recruitment, providing or receiving training for terrorist purposes,
      dissemination of terrorist propaganda, glorification of terrorism, and incitement or threatening
      to commit terrorist acts. In some of the concluded proceedings, charges for terrorist offences
      were brought together with charges for weapons- or explosives-related offences, as well as other
      non-terrorist offences.

          Case example
          On 27 February 2025, in Germany, an individual was sentenced to a prison term of five years
          and six months for supporting a terrorist organisation, conspiracy to commit murder, and
          membership in a terrorist organisation abroad. In August 2023, the defendant and another
          defendant sent EUR 200 as a donation via an intermediary to an IS member in Iran. He then

   30 Member States did not provide information on the age of 23 individuals arrested (15 arrests for jihadism, five

   arrests for right-wing terrorism, and three arrests for other forms of terrorism have no age recorded).
   31 Eurojust received contributions containing information on convictions and acquittals from the following

   Member States: Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
   Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain and Sweden. The
   numbers included in the statistics concern only concluded proceedings for terrorist offences. They do not
   include proceedings for hate crime, racism or xenophobia.
   32 Due to the specifics of reporting, some Member States submit information on final decisions only, while

   others additionally report on decisions that are not final. If a judgment handed down in 2025 was appealed
   against and the appeal was concluded before the end of the year, Eurojust reported only on the latest/final
   judgment.
                                                                                                                 23
                                                                                      Europol Public Information

          joined ISKP and was tasked with carrying out an attack in Europe. From then on, he and the
          other defendant planned to kill police officers and other people with firearms in Stockholm.
          On 9 September 2023, both travelled to Czechia to purchase firearms and ammunition, but
          were unsuccessful. The attack was not carried out.

          Case example
          On 21 March 2025, in France, five individuals were convicted for their involvement in the
          hostage taking and torture of four French journalists and other Western victims kidnapped in
          2013 and 2014 in Syria. The group’s leader was sentenced to life imprisonment, with 22 years
          to be served before he is eligible for parole, for directing a terrorist group and ordering
          unlawful confinement and torture in a terrorist context. Two other defendants received the
          same penalty for participation in a criminal enterprise with a view to prepare terrorist acts
          and unlawful confinement and torture, both in a terrorist context. They were already
          sentenced to life imprisonment for the 2015 attacks in Paris, the 2016 attacks in Brussels, and
          for the 2014 attack on the Jewish Museum in Brussels, respectively. The fourth defendant was
          one of the jailers of the hostages and received 22 years’ imprisonment. The fifth defendant
          helped kidnap the victims and was sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment.

          Case example
          On 6 March 2025, in Germany, a defendant was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for
          supporting a terrorist organisation abroad and the preparation of a serious act of violence
          endangering the state. The man supported IS by transferring a total of USD 1 675.59 in
          cryptocurrency. He decided to join the terrorist organisation as a fighter and received training
          in the use of firearms. To this end, he planned to travel to Mecca in June 2024 during a
          pilgrimage with his mother, using IS smugglers to enter IS operational territory and join ISKP.
          He was arrested at the airport.

          Case example
          On 12 November 2025, in Malta, an individual was sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment. The
          man, who travelled frequently to Malta, was arrested in October 2024. He was prosecuted for
          disseminating a significant volume of extremist propaganda and engaging in the online
          recruitment of individuals for the purpose of committing terrorist acts across various
          jurisdictions. Evidence found on his electronic devices included videos promoting acts of
          terrorism, audio files of jihadist speeches and hymns, and content explicitly supporting IS.



Convictions and acquittals
      All the concluded court proceedings reported above, relating to terrorist offences in Croatia,
      Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Portugal and
      Romania in 2025, resulted in convictions. Some of the defendants acquitted of terrorist offences
      were found guilty of weapons-related offences, participation in an organised crime group,
      murder, or other criminal offences33.

      Similar to 2024, court proceedings concerning jihadist terrorism concluded in 2025 resulted in
      convictions for 88% of the defendants. The concluded proceedings concerning right-wing
      terrorism also resulted in convictions for 88% of all defendants. Ethno-nationalist and separatist
      terrorism and left-wing terrorism-related proceedings concluded with a conviction rate of 76%
      and 41% of all accused respectively.


   33 Eurojust considers it one verdict if a person is convicted of more than one terrorist offence within the same

   proceeding, or convicted of a terrorist offence and acquitted of another offence. If a person is acquitted of a
   terrorist offence and convicted of another offence, the verdict is included in the overview as an acquittal.
                                                                                                                     24
                                                                                     Europol Public Information


Penalties
      The average prison sentence for terrorist offences in the reported court proceedings concluded
      in 2025 was six years, which is similar to 2023 and 202434. The prison sentences handed down by
      courts in the Member States for terrorist offences in 2025 ranged from two months to life
      imprisonment without the possibility of parole.

      Prison terms of up to five years remained the most common penalty for terrorist offences (67%).
      Penalties of 10 or more years of imprisonment were given to 17% of those convicted of terrorist
      offences.

      It should, however, be taken into consideration that the severity of the penalty in each case
      depended on the respective offence and the specific circumstances and cannot serve any
      comparative purposes.

      In some cases, the court ordered the suspension of all or parts of the penalty for a period of time
      or in its entirety, under specific probation conditions.

      Other penalties were also ordered in addition, or as an alternative, to the prison sentences.
      These included community service, supervised probation, fines, or psychiatric treatment. In many
      cases the court-imposed restrictions on exercising certain civil and political rights, expulsion from
      national territory, fixed probation period upon release, involvement in de-radicalisation and re-
      integration programmes, a ban on holding public office, compensation to victims, withdrawal of
      citizenship, etc.

      Offenders who were minor were given prison terms or placed in a correctional institution, in
      some cases with mandatory psychiatric and psychological monitoring or treatment.




   34 For the purpose of calculating the average prison sentence, penalties exceeding 40 years’ imprisonment and

   life sentences were counted as 40 years, unless the court indicated a specific number of years to be served. In
   cases where the court ordered a possibility of parole after a certain number of years have been served, that
   number of years is included in the overview.
                                                                                                                 25
                     Europol Public Information



JIHADIST TERRORISM




                                            26
                                                                                     Europol Public Information




           JIHADIST TERRORISM
           For the EU TE-SAT, jihadism may be described as a violent sub-set of Salafism that rejects
           democracy and elected parliaments, arguing that human legislation is at odds with God’s status
           as the sole lawgiver. Jihadists aim to create an Islamic state governed exclusively by Islamic law
           (shari’a), as they interpret it. They legitimise their use of violence by referring to the classical
           Islamic doctrines on jihad. All those who oppose their jihadist interpretations of Islamic law are
           considered as ‘enemies of Islam’35.




   Actors
   Jihadist terrorist actors in the EU mostly acted alone or within networks of like-minded
   individuals, often transnational, rather than embedded within strict hierarchical organisations. All
   completed attacks were carried out by lone actors, who all appear to have been adult males. In
   some cases, the perpetrators were reported to have suffered from mental health issues.

       Case example
       On 13 February 2025, in Germany, a 24-year-old male drove his car into the rear of a moving
       crowd in Munich, killing two and injuring 57 people. The perpetrator was arrested at the
       scene and alleged to have committed the act out of religious motivation.

   Some of the foiled attacks were plotted by underage males, while 108 out of 347 individuals
   arrested in the context of jihadist terrorist offences were 18 or younger36.

       Case example
       On 7 October 2025, in Italy, a 17-year-old was arrested on suspicion of recruitment with
       terrorist purposes and the unlawful possession of harmful objects. A multimedia analysis
       revealed his online radicalisation and various internet searches regarding IS, jihad, weapons
       and bomb manufacturing. Among the content saved on his device was a pledge of allegiance
       to IS, forwarded to an identified individual who shared his radical ideology.

   Perpetrators of jihadist terrorist attacks pledged allegiance to IS in several cases. Most often,
   however, there was little evidence that they were actually instructed by IS, nor did the group
   claim responsibility for them. In one case in 2025, an attacker had previous links to IS.

       Case example
       On 18 May 2025, in Germany, a 35-year-old man stabbed people with knives outside a local
       bar in Bielefeld, critically injuring four victims. The perpetrator joined IS in Syria by May 2015
       at the latest. Even after his entry into Germany in the summer of 2023, he remained
       connected to IS. In early May 2025, he made the decision to kill as many randomly selected
       people as possible in the name of a global jihad.

35 Some contributed attacks or arrests may not fully align with this description. However, this classification is

used for analytical purposes. The EU TE-SAT follows the categorisation provided by the Member States.
36 15 out of 344 arrests reported by the Member States did not specify the age.


                                                                                                                    27
                                                                                    Europol Public Information



   Most arrested suspects were reported to have been inspired by IS propaganda. Yet, some were
   found to express support for both IS and AQ, or even non-Salafi-jihadist terrorist groups. Anti-
   Semitic narratives frequently were a common element. In addition, irrespective of ideological
   preferences, a fascination with violence was noted to play a role in radicalisation.

   Attribution to terrorist groups was typically indirect, based on factors such as law enforcement
   investigations or a pledge of allegiance (bay’a) made by the individual involved. Some suspects,
   however, appeared to be in direct contact with members of terrorist organisations in other
   countries, including Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iraq.

       Case example
       On 18 June 2025, in Italy, a 20-year-old was arrested on suspicion of membership of IS. He
       shared propaganda material through a messaging platform and possessed material suitable
       for the manufacturing of weapons, devices and explosives. The individual also maintained
       contact with an ISKP member in Afghanistan, with whom he planned his journey to the region
       to participate in combat or carry out attacks in the West.

   Many concluded court proceedings in 2025 concerned offences linked to terrorist groups in Syria,
   such as IS, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), while still listed, or their affiliates.

   Some individuals were arrested for trying to travel to Syria in 2025 to join IS 37. Some other arrests
   reported in 2025 concerned individuals returning from conflict zones.

       Case example
       On 2 September 2025, in France, a 24-year-old returnee from Syria was arrested upon her
       arrival in France after she had been expelled by Türkiye. The woman was the daughter of two
       jihadists who died in Syria. Following statements concerning her jihadist background, she was
       charged and placed under judicial supervision.



   Narrative
   In 2025, the volume of official IS terrorist propaganda via its ‘provinces’ or regional branches
   remained at a low level. In addition to statements of attacks carried out, as of the end of 2025, IS
   published a few videos, but no speech from the leadership.

   The most prominent pro-IS media outlet, Al-Azaim, which also played a role in the sudden rise in
   2024 of the terrorist threats to Europe by the closely associated ISKP, suffered a serious blow in
   2025 when one of its core members was arrested in a joint Turkish-Pakistani operation. This led
   to a sharp decline of its propaganda production. In 2025, the only consistently published IS
   ideological propaganda was the editorial of its weekly Arabic newsletter al-Naba’.

   IS propaganda pursued various objectives: to (re)state the fundamental tenets of its ideology to
   promote group identity and cohesion; to antagonise perceived enemies - not only the global
   West and governments of Muslim countries, but also competitors within the jihadist milieu,
   including AQ; and to incite sympathisers to carry out autonomous attacks. To this latter end, IS
   propaganda exploited events perceived as victimising Muslims and generating grievances among



37 15 out of 486 arrests were reported on suspicion of travel for terrorist purposes, as the primary offence. An

additional 9 arrests reported travel for terrorist purposes as an additional offence. A majority of these arrests
concerned individuals that were trying to travel to Syria to join IS.
                                                                                                                28
                                                                          Europol Public Information

its audiences. Most prominently in 2025, it instrumentalised the conflict in Gaza to fuel anti-
Semitic narratives, including calls to target Jewish individuals, communities and interests.

In 2025, IS avoided issuing statements of responsibility for inspired lone actor terrorist attacks
carried out by supporters, as had been its practice in years past. The group also advised against
recording and sending videos of allegiance. In contrast, it claimed that it broadly incited terrorist
attacks by spreading its ideology. Indirect attribution helped IS promote itself as a primary actor
on the jihadist scene. It also served to counter the risk of being marginalised to the advantage of
other groups, which played a more active role in current conflicts, for example in Gaza.

   Case example
   The editorial of the 18 December 2025 al-Naba’ issue, dedicated to the Bondi Beach attack in
   Australia, mocks the West for looking for IS organisation and leadership. The West overlooks
   the nature of IS, whose strength consists in its ‘jihadi code’.

The conflict in Gaza was a recurrent theme in AQ’s propaganda. This topic had always been a
core issue for the former organisation and its founder, Osama bin Laden. AQ leveraged
propaganda referring to Gaza to increase its influence on the jihadist scene, which declined
following the rise of IS after its split from AQ in 2013.

Within the AQ franchise, the propaganda of the Somali Harakat al-Shabab al-Mujahidin (HSM or
al-Shabaab) and the Sahel-based JNIM was mostly focused on local issues. Al-Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) in Yemen, by contrast, was eager to exploit the conflict in Gaza to
incite terrorist attacks against the West. AQAP published motivational and instructional
propaganda under its ‘Inspire’ brand, writing guides for aspirational lone actors and using lessons
learnt, even from non-jihadist terrorist attacks.

   Case example
   In June 2025, AQAP published a guide based on the 21 May 2025 terrorist attack in
   Washington, urging readers to follow the example of the Latino Christian attacker who acted
   to ‘defend Palestine’. AQAP also published two other guides based on terrorist attacks against
   Jewish targets in Colorado and Manchester.

However, contrary to the decline of official and supportive propaganda, the trend of increasing
user-generated terrorist content continued in 2025. Independent producers, quite often young
individuals, demonstrated notable creativity in their approach. They frequently created short
videos combining visual elements extracted from official terrorist propaganda, current news or
sources unrelated to terrorism (e.g. sequences of videogames), with a ‘soundtrack’, generally
jihadist hymns or passages of speeches of jihadist leaders.

Pro-IS media outlets also published threats against public events, most commonly as advice to
supporters to choose a target from a list. However, this type of propaganda decreased compared
to 2024, when pro-IS media outlets had launched an intense campaign of threats against sports
events.



Means
Perpetrators of jihadist terrorist attacks in Member States continued to employ simple modi
operandi. Eight of the nine completed jihadist terrorist attacks in 2025 were perpetrated by
stabbing with knives; one attacker used his private car to ram people in a crowd. The targets
were predominantly random people in public places.

                                                                                                    29
                                                                         Europol Public Information

   Case example
   On 15 February 2025, in Austria, a man killed a 14-year-old boy and injured several others in a
   random stabbing attack using a knife. The attacker pledged allegiance to IS. He had been
   radicalised online within a short period of time by himself, without influence or guidance from
   others.

While the use of complex attack methods continued to be discussed, the lack of operational
experience or adequate contacts limited these ambitions.

Key means to link core terrorist organisations with the broad network of potential supporters are
online communication and terrorist propaganda. Radicalisation processes often developed
rapidly, frequently beginning with exposure to user-generated jihadist propaganda disseminated
on a range of platforms, including online communities, youth-oriented social media or gaming
platforms. Such content and platforms provided a low-threshold entry point, particularly for
young and vulnerable individuals, with subsequent engagements frequently migrating to more
secure online environments.

Among jihadist actors, a gradual increase in the use of AI for propaganda purposes was noted,
possibly linked to the technological affinity of an increasingly younger jihadist scene. Some
individuals also adopted strong security measures regarding their mobile devices, including the
use of VPNs, encrypted applications, frequent reformatting of devices and repeated installation
and uninstallation of mobile applications.

At the same time, notwithstanding the central role played by online spaces in radicalisation
pathways, personal interactions remained important as well. Networks and groups that formed
online then meet up in person, discussing for example attack plans or the possibilities to travel
abroad to join IS.

   Case example
   On 22 April 2025, in the Netherlands, 14 young suspects were arrested. They were involved in
   the production and distribution of IS propaganda online. Certain suspects tried to encourage
   others to carry out terrorist offences. The suspects formed an online network, but some also
   met offline.

With regard to terrorist financing, attacks carried out by lone actors generally required minimal
financial resources, particularly when simple methods were employed. Sporadically, cases of self-
financing or third-party support have been observed, mainly to facilitate individuals’ travel to
conflict zone.

   Case example
   On 1 April 2025, in France, a 35-year-old female was arrested on suspicion of terrorism
   financing in favour of her friend engaged in jihad in Syria, who was still located there.

Sources of funding may be legitimate income, loans, social benefits, donations or crowd funding
campaigns, but could also be illicitly generated via for example fraud, theft or the sale of drugs.
Collections were also made within the Muslim community under the guise of charity.
Unbeknownst to certain donors, these funds may be diverted abroad and used to support
terrorist-related activities.

Funds were transferred through bank transfers, hawala banking, money transfer services or
money couriers. There was also a growing interest in using digital money transfers and virtual
currencies.


                                                                                                    30
                                             Europol Public Information

Right-wing terrorism and violent extremism




                                                                    31
                                                                                     Europol Public Information




           RIGHT-WING TERRORISM
           For the EU TE-SAT, right-wing terrorists seek to transform the political, social and economic
           system into an authoritarian model, rejecting democratic order and values and fundamental
           rights. A core concept is supremacism, or the idea that as a group of people sharing a common
           element (nation, race, culture, etc.), they are superior to all others and consider it to be their
           natural right to dominate the rest of the population. Right-wing violent ideologies feed on a
           variety of hateful sub-cultures that often oppose diversity in society and equal rights of
           minorities38.




   Actors
   Lone actors and small cells remained the most common perpetrators of right-wing terrorism and
   violent extremism incidents. They regularly lacked formal ties to right-wing terrorist or violent
   extremist organisations, but many were assessed not to be entirely isolated. Several of them
   were influenced by, or loosely connected to, broader violent right-wing networks. This often
   happened via engagement in fluid online structures and virtual ecosystems, but also via in-person
   associations.

       Case example
       On 25 February 2025, the leader and two members of the Sturmjäger Division, a neo-Nazi
       group inspired by the ideology of The Base, were convicted in Belgium. The leader of the
       group spread propaganda to recruit new members, incited and instructed group members to
       violence and set up members’ ‘rank lists’ on the basis of the executed actions. He also shared
       manuals and videos on how to make weapons and explosives and encouraged group
       members to prepare for violent acts. He was sentenced to a prison term of eight years and a
       fine. The other two members spread extremist propaganda through social media and incited
       others to commit terrorist acts. They were sentenced to 40 months and 24 months of
       imprisonment respectively and a fine.

   All individuals involved in attack plots or arrested on suspicion of right-wing offences were male.
   Multiple Member States raised concern about radicalisation in prison and/or the release from
   prison of former arrestees still adhering to extremist ideas. One arrested individual had
   previously spent time in prison.

   Perpetrators of right-wing attacks and suspects often included young people and frequently
   displayed a range of vulnerabilities, including mental health issues or broader psychosocial
   challenges.

   Such individuals were at higher risk of rapid and widespread exposure to violent extremist
   propaganda, a vulnerability that is amplified within online extremist ecosystems. Easily


38 Some contributed attacks or arrests may not fully align with this description. However, this classification is

used for analytical purposes. The EU TE-SAT follows the categorisation provided by the Member States.
                                                                                                                    32
                                                                                    Europol Public Information

   accessible, dynamic and encrypted digital environments accelerated radicalisation processes and
   the progression towards operational activity.

       Case example
       On 17 July 2025, in Italy, authorities dismantled a violent extremist group that was active in
       the virtual dissemination of neo-Nazi, accelerationist, supremacist, xenophobic and anti-
       Semitic propaganda, aimed at inciting discrimination or violence on racial, ethnic and religious
       grounds.

   In parallel, offline organisational structures complemented the right-wing terrorism and violent
   extremism landscape in the EU, encompassing groups primarily nationally focused as well as
   transnational networks. This included both established organisations and newly emerging
   entities. Of the five attacks reported, two were not attributed to lone actors. The average age of
   individuals involved in such offline groups appeared to be higher than that of those engaged
   primarily in online environments.

       Case example
       In February 2025, in Germany, police arrested two male members of the Letzte
       Verteidigungswelle (Last Wave of Defence) for attacking a refugee shelter. They spray painted
       “L.V.W” and xenophobic slogans, gave a fascist salute, and aimed a battery of fireworks at the
       building. In May 2025, authorities arrested another four suspected members and one
       supporter of this same right-wing group. The group aims to dismantle Germany’s democratic
       system through violence, especially arson and bomb attacks against migrants and political
       opponents.

   Prominent, though not exhaustive, examples of violent transnational networks included The Base
   and so-called ‘Active Clubs’. The Base is a neo-Nazi, accelerationist paramilitary network
   composed of cells operating in the EU, amongst others. It is the first and only right-wing group to
   be included on the EU’s terrorist sanctions list. So-called ‘Active Clubs’ constitute a decentralised
   network of groups that cultivate physical strength, group solidarity and personal confidence.
   They adhere to right-wing extremist ideologies and have an active presence in multiple Member
   States across the EU39.

       Case example
       On 25 November 2025, in Spain, three members of the terrorist organisation The Base were
       arrested on suspicion of membership of a terrorist organisation, recruitment, indoctrination
       and training for terrorist purposes; collaboration with a terrorist organisation; and various
       related offences such as unlawful possession of weapons40.

   As commonly observed in the past, right-wing actors consistently maintained international
   networks and participated in events across various EU countries, including music concerts and
   festivals, MMA and boxing tournaments, commemorative marches, demonstrations and
   seminars. These gatherings provided opportunities for individuals to meet, strengthen
   relationships and establish enduring transnational cooperation.




39 “Active Clubs” functions as an umbrella label. It serves in some cases as a model for similar clubs that do not

explicitly use this name, while at the same time there are also ordinary training schools and gyms that operate
under this label without any connection to right-wing extremism.
40 Europol 2025, ‘Europol and Spanish national police disrupt activities of far-right terrorist group The Base,

https://www.europol.europa.eu/media-press/newsroom/news/europol-and-spanish-national-police-disrupt-
activities-of-far-right-terrorist-group-base.
                                                                                                                33
                                                                        Europol Public Information


Narrative
Traditional right-wing narratives remained persistent, but were increasingly shaped and
complemented by a diverse range of ideologies and ideas, including conspiracy theories. This
contributed to a decline in overall ideological consistency. Additional influential drivers included
accelerationist concepts, nihilistic justifications for violence and elements drawn from other
violent subcultures. In some cases, these influences even intersected with jihadist frameworks, as
illustrated by concepts like ‘White Jihad’.

   Case example
   On 12 February 2025, in Italy, a 15-year-old was arrested on charges including conspiracy to
   commit terrorism, the manufacturing and use of explosive devices, illegal possession of
   weapons, aggravated damage and the possession and distribution of child sexual abuse
   material (CSAM). He was very active on online channels, a suspected member of a Satanist,
   neo-Nazi supremacist group and joined a right-wing group allegedly planning a terrorist
   attack. Investigators also found content linked to IS, including propaganda, attack footage,
   beheadings and instructions for improvised explosive devices (IED).

Terrorist content online typically focused on past perpetrators and attacks, specific terrorist
organisations or the portrayal of violence as a necessary means, often at the expense of a clearly
articulated ideological components.

   Case example
   On 13 December 2025, in Italy, a 15-year-old was arrested following an investigation into his
   activities in radicalised supremacist, neo-Nazi and anti-Semitic online environments. He
   shared numerous posts openly praising and glorifying white supremacist attackers and
   perpetrators of deadly school shootings.

Certain right-wing actors deliberately chose - at least in public - to avoid overtly extremist or
terrorist rhetoric. This strategy may avoid law enforcement scrutiny and/or make their ideas
acceptable to a broader audience, thereby contributing to the normalisation of such narratives.

While approximately 30% of right-wing associated arrests were linked to incitement and the
making of threats, several Member States also noted the ongoing prevalence of hate speech.
Although often offensive, such speech may remain lawful, underscoring the complexity of
determining precisely where the threshold for terrorist content lies.

   Case example
   On 12 September 2025, in the Netherlands, a 31-year-old man was arrested for making
   several online threats with terrorist intent. These were threats of violence against Muslims
   and he indicated a specific time for a stabbing. He also gave the fascist salute.

Physical meetings and personal connections served as one channel for disseminating
propaganda, as illustrated by various international events attended by right-wing circles.
However, propaganda also spread extensively online. Users leveraged social media platforms and
digital services to share a wide range of content, including documents, photographs, videos, GIFs,
memes and music. In this context, it is noteworthy that right-wing terrorist or violent extremist
actors often relied on symbols and aesthetic codes, such as runes, numeric codes or meme
characters, both to signal group affiliation and to circumvent moderation in online spaces.




                                                                                                    34
                                                                          Europol Public Information


Means
Firearms and explosives have traditionally held a particular appeal for right-wing terrorist and
violent extremist actors. The five terrorist attacks in the EU in 2025 included improvised explosive
devices (IEDs), firearms and bladed weapons.
Additionally, while it remained challenging to develop and adopt other tools, right-wing terrorist
and violent extremist actors continued to display a fascination in more innovative attack methods
such as 3D-printed weapons or drones.

   Case example
   On 16 June 2025, in Portugal, four individuals were arrested on suspicion of planning to
   commit offences related to a terrorist group and for the possession and manufacturing of 3D-
   printed weapons with a terrorist intent.

In general, the threat of violence was often directed at places of worship, religious communities,
asylum seekers’ centres, perceived ideological enemies or ethnic minorities.

   Case example
   On 4 November 2025, in Ireland, two men were identified as part of a group planning a
   terrorist attack on a mosque using explosives and incendiary devices. The plot has been
   claimed by the so-called Irish Defence Army (IDA). Two additional individuals have been
   released from custody pending further direction from the Office of the Director of Public
   Prosecutions.

Segments within the right-wing landscape in the EU, including the so-called ‘Active Clubs‘, were
engaged in a range of physical training activities, including martial arts, boxing, survival training,
fight clubs and shooting practice. This enabled participants to acquire potentially dangerous skills
and tactical knowledge. These activities often went hand in hand with an emphasis on physical
fitness, discipline, group cohesion and personal confidence.

Considering the means for radicalisation and recruitment, the previously identified uptick in the
use of messaging services continued. Users resorted to these platforms to recruit other
members, share propaganda, promote violence and plan physical attacks. This growth was
accompanied by a well-established abuse of other social media services and online platforms,
including gaming platforms. The rise of AI enabled new opportunities regarding widespread
content creation, but also to gather information to plan and prepare attacks.

Users continued to employ several common practices to elude moderation efforts and reduce
down time. For instance, they created multiple channel aliases and rebranded them or renamed
them at the same time. Content and networks could thus quickly be re-established if removed.
Users avoided moderation attempts on themselves by continuously renaming themselves or
creating numerous online identities that are left dormant until one or more are removed by the
hosting platform.

Regarding financial means, most funds were raised and transferred via simple legal means, such
as self-financing via personal funds, membership fees, sales of merchandise, entry fees for events
or donation campaigns. However, some financial means were collected via illegal methods, such
as engagement in criminal activities, and some actors adopted more advanced technical tools
such as fundraising and money movements via cryptocurrencies.




                                                                                                    35
                                                          Europol Public Information

Left-wing and anarchist terrorism and violent extremism




                                                                                 36
                                                                                     Europol Public Information




       LEFT-WING AND ANARCHIST TERRORISM
       For the EU TE-SAT, left-wing terrorist groups seek to trigger a violent revolution against
       the political, social and economic system of a state, in order to establish socialism and ultimately
       establish a communist and classless society. Their ideology is often Marxist-Leninist. Anarchist
       terrorism is a term used to describe acts of violence committed by groups or individuals who
       promote the absence of authority as a societal model. Anarchists pursue a revolutionary,
       anti-capitalist and anti-authoritarian agenda41.




   Actors
   Both terrorist organisations and lone actors were involved in left-wing and anarchist terrorist
   attacks and arrests, but a majority of attacks were carried out by unknown perpetrators.

       Case example
       On 18 December 2025, in Italy, two masked individuals set fire to three private cars used by
       Guardia di Finanza, parked at the barracks hosting Rome’s Financial and Economic Police Unit.
       The attack was claimed on 7 January 2026 in a document stressing the need to attack the
       military and internal control apparatus.

   The concluded proceedings concerned activities related to or claimed by the Revolutionary
   People's Liberation Party/Front (DHKP-C), the Revenge Coalition Group, Armed Response, and
   Revolutionary Continuity.

       Case example
       On 18 July 2025, in Greece, seven defendants were convicted for their role in several attacks
       with IEDs and grenades in Greek cities in 2023 and 2024. Responsibility was claimed by the
       terrorist organisation Revenge Coalition Group. The defendants were also prosecuted in
       relation to the letter bomb sent to the Thessaloniki Courthouse and addressed to the
       President of the Court of Appeal in 2024, responsibility for which was claimed by the terrorist
       organisation Armed Response. The leader of the group was sentenced to a total of 37 years of
       imprisonment. The remaining six defendants were handed prison terms ranging from two to
       over 30 years.

   12 out of 13 arrestees for left-wing and anarchist terrorist offences were men with ages ranging
   from 22 to 79 years old. One arrestee was a 39-year old woman.

   The terrorist threat posed by returning left-wing or anarchist fighters who joined either side of
   the Russian-Ukrainian conflict, as well as those who have participated in combat operations or
   military training in Syrian-Kurdish conflict zones, persisted.



41 Some contributed attacks or arrests may not fully align with this description. However, this classification is

used for analytical purposes. The EU TE-SAT follows the categorisation provided by the Member States.
                                                                                                                    37
                                                                        Europol Public Information

Violent extremists continued to maintain transnational networks, frequently travelling between
Member States. These interactions strengthened interpersonal ties, facilitated the exchange of
strategies and operational knowledge and reinforced support for imprisoned or deceased
associates.

In 2025, some countries observed a shift towards more violent behavior, including the use of
harsher tactics, heightened unpredictability and a growing willingness to consider certain
individuals as legitimate targets.



Narrative
The narratives by left-wing and anarchist terrorist actors remained largely consistent, frequently
incorporating references to the conflict in Gaza. Anti-Semitism, anti-Israeli or anti-Zionist
sentiments were explicitly expressed in seven out of 10 responsibility claims reported.

   Case example
   On 18 January 2025, in Italy, an IED caused material damage to a building housing a travel
   agency. This terrorist attack was claimed on 24 January 2025 through a parcel sent to the
   company, containing a bullet and a letter stating that transporting goods and weapons to
   Israel is certainly profitable, but extremely dangerous.

The conflict in Gaza served as a mobilising factor in the left-wing extremist environment,
fostering a sense of unity among diverse actors by framing a perceived common adversary.

Beyond the conflict, left-wing and anarchist terrorist and violent extremist actors often brought
together several narratives and grievances. Other themes included anti-militaristic, anti-
capitalist, anti-imperialism, anti-prison and anti-corporate sentiments; solidarity to incarcerated
anarchists; and opposition to State repression and to migration control policies. Additional issues
included support for the Kurdish cause, anti-technology positions and anti-racism.

   Case example
   On 31 March 2025, in Italy, an IED was found and disarmed in the Criminology Department of
   the University of Perugia. The anarchist group Kyriakos Xymitiris claimed responsibility. They
   emphasised that they wanted to target a training centre for the future (national) intelligence
   community.

Climate and environmental issues also remained a major concern in the left-wing and anarchist
violent extremist scene. Some individuals demonstrated increased levels of radicalisation,
engaging in disruptive actions such as civil disobedience, sabotage and property damage.



Means
Left-wing and terrorist attacks in 2025 indicate a continued use of simple and easily accessible
tools. Arson was the preferred means in six terrorist attacks, with improvised incendiary devices
(IIDs) used in three of them and fire accelerators in the rest. IEDs were used in three completed
attacks and one failed attack. Two terrorist attacks resulted in limited damage to property with
rudimentary or unknown means.




   Case example
                                                                                                 38
                                                                        Europol Public Information

   On 11 April 2025, in Greece, two perpetrators placed a backpack containing an IED outside
   the premises of the Hellenic Train company. The explosion caused material damage to the
   building as well as to nearby buildings and cars. The Revolutionary Class Self Defence claimed
   responsibility for the attack through on a known anarchist website on 13 April 2025.

Targets of left-wing and anarchist terrorist and violent extremist actors included municipal
buildings, financial institutions and banks, corporate entities, university premises,
telecommunications infrastructure and targets linked to law enforcement and prison
administration. Symbolic attacks targeting corporate entities allegedly connected to Israel were
also committed.

Most terrorist attacks were relatively low cost and could be financed either by perpetrators
themselves or through funds collected within broader left-wing and anarchist networks. Funding
generally relied on a variety of sources, including personal income, membership fees, donations,
crowdfunding initiatives, the sale of accessories, literature and other products, fundraising events
and, in some cases, the illegitimate use of governmental financial support allocated to legitimate
left-wing extremist foundations and associations.

Terrorist and violent extremist left-wing and anarchist actors were generally hesitant in their use
of social media. Nevertheless, online platforms have remained important for public engagement,
ideological dissemination and mobilisation efforts, while some actors demonstrated significant
technical expertise, employing encrypted messaging, secure email and anonymity-focused
platforms, along with other tools to safeguard identity and data. While social media facilitates
rapid mobilisation, encrypted closed groups are often used for internal coordination.

The use of AI remained contested, but was nonetheless likely used by some violent left-wing and
anarchist actors to produce propaganda. It allows for the automated production of propaganda,
thereby enabling extremist narratives to spread at minimal cost and with global reach.

At the same time, technological developments have not replaced offline socialisation. In some
cases, prison environments or contacts with released terrorists have also further facilitated
radicalisation and recruitment.




                                                                                                   39
                                                               Europol Public Information

Ethno-nationalist and separatist terrorism and violent extremism




                                                                                      40
                                                                                     Europol Public Information




       ETHNO-NATIONALIST AND SEPARATIST TERRORISM
       For the EU TE-SAT, ethno-nationalist and separatist terrorist groups are motivated by nationalism,
       ethnicity and/or religion. Separatist groups seek to carve out a state for themselves from a larger
       country or annex territory from one country to that of another. Left-wing or right-wing ideological
       elements are not uncommon in ethno-nationalist and separatist terrorist groups42.




   Actors
   There were no verified ethno-nationalist and separatist terrorist attacks in the EU reported by
   Member States in 2025, but the number of arrests signals that it remains a threat. The Kurdistan
   Workers’ Party (PKK) remained the most significant actor affecting the EU, while dissident
   republican groups and Corsican and Basque separatist actors also stayed active.

       Case example
       On 20 May 2025, in Germany, a 61-year-old male was arrested on suspicion of being a
       member of the PKK. He is suspected of having served as a full-time PKK cadre between June
       2016 and July 2023, being responsible for the coordination and implementation of
       propaganda activities in Europe.

   The average age of individuals arrested for ethno-nationalist and separatist terrorist offences was
   45, with ages ranging from 20 to 76, and a large majority of them being male43.

   The most significant development affecting the ethno-nationalist and separatist threat
   environment in the EU was Abdullah Öcalan’s call of 27 February 2025 for the PKK to disarm and
   dissolve, followed by the organisation’s announcement in May that it would dissolve and end
   armed struggle. However, despite the political significance and the uncertainty it introduced,
   several Member States assessed that it has not yet led to any significant changes in support
   structures or operational behaviour in the EU.

   Dissident republican groups remained relevant primarily in Ireland and Northern Ireland. The
   principal actors continued to be the New Irish Republican Army (IRA), Continuity IRA and other
   splinter republican structures that reject the peace settlement and retain an anti-state and anti-
   security force orientation. Member State reporting indicated that these organisations remain
   small, clandestine and criminally embedded.


       Case example
       On 10 March 2025, in Ireland, two males were arrested for membership of an unlawful
       organisation suspected for involvement in IRA operational activity. Evidence suggesting an



42 Some contributed attacks or arrests may not fully align with this description. However, this classification is

used for analytical purposes. The EU TE-SAT follows the categorisation provided by the Member States.
43 32 arrested individuals were male. Two arrested individuals were women.


                                                                                                                    41
                                                                        Europol Public Information

   attempt to conceal unidentified items in a forested area was recovered. Two other male
   suspects were also stopped and searched at a location some distance away from the scene.

Corsican separatist violence remained relevant in France. The principal reference points
continued to be the Fronte di liberazione naziunale di a Corsica (FLNC) and newer youth-linked
clandestine structures, notably Ghjuventù Clandestina Corsa (GCC). These actors continued to
pursue armed struggle, even though the volume of attributable activity remained below the 2023
peak.

   Case example
   In May 2025, in France, authorities arrested several individuals suspected of carrying out, or
   attempting to carry out, explosive or arson-related acts of vandalism in Corsica in October
   2023, claimed by the FLNC.

In 2025, there was an increase in violence by the Basque extremist separatist milieu. This activity
mostly involved younger actors from a pro-independence environment, close to the ultra-left. At
the same time, Catalan extremist separatism remained fragmented, operationally weak and
largely limited to sporadic and symbolic activity, with no indication of capacity for sustained or
scalable violence.

Other individuals or groups may hold ethno-nationalist or separatist motivations, but are
assessed to have been less prominently represented in 2025. Occasionally, there was some
overlap with the left-wing scene.



Narrative
The exact ethno-nationalist and separatist narratives varied by actor, but were typically centred
on self-determination and identity politics, local grievances, perceived repression by the state,
solidarity with affiliated communities abroad and the portrayal of violence or coercion as
legitimate resistance.

Digital platforms continued to support propaganda dissemination, recruitment, financing and
mobilisation across the ethno-nationalist and separatist environment. The dominant channels
reported by Member States included websites, television channels, social media platforms,
messaging applications, print publications and online media.



Means
No terrorist attacks were reported. Most activities were concentrated on logistical support,
propaganda, recruitment and financing, with the latter being a key dimension in the ethno-
nationalist and separatist landscape in the EU.

   Case example
   On 4 November 2025, in Finland, three male individuals were arrested on suspicion of
   collecting money for the PKK in Finland.

In the PKK context, both online and offline communication was central to strategic messaging,
ideological dissemination, event mobilisation and network maintenance. Regarding PKK
financing, Member States assessed it as structured, transnational and diversified. It included
annual campaigns such as Kampanya, voluntary donations, coerced contributions, membership

                                                                                                    42
                                                                       Europol Public Information

fees, event-based collection, commercial fundraising and the use of associations, media entities,
charitable fronts, cash couriers and other legal and illegal channels.

The nexus with organised crime remained visible in the context of ethno-nationalist terrorism
and violent extremism. Illegal PKK fundraising was associated with fraud, money laundering and
extortion. There were also indications of links between PKK-related networks and organised
criminal actors, including drug trafficking connections. Dissident republican groups were likewise
reported to be regularly involved in extortion, smuggling, drug dealing, protection activity and
debt collection.




                                                                                                43
          Europol Public Information



OUTLOOK




                                 44
                                                                         Europol Public Information

The threat posed to the European Union by terrorism and violent extremism is expected to
remain highly dynamic. Against the backdrop of a rapidly evolving geopolitical, socio-economic
and technological environment, the coming period is assessed as critical in shaping the future
terrorist and extremist threats, as well as in determining the effectiveness of efforts to counter
them.



A shifting context
Ongoing international conflicts and developments, rapid technological progress, evolving political
and institutional dynamics, migration pressures, economic uncertainty and financial instability,
and unforeseen crises are among the key drivers currently reshaping the context in which
terrorism and violent extremism develop.

The accumulation of these drivers contributes to polarisation and the spread of hostile rhetoric,
particularly when complex issues are framed in overly simplistic and adversarial terms. This in
turn fuels violent extremist and terrorist narratives and self-perceived identities. It shapes views
on reality, objectives, and perceived enemies - such as political opponents, global elites and
marginalised communities. Extremist ideas, including the mere use of violence for the sake of
violence, may become normalised. Fringe movements may also acquire increased visibility and
momentum, while new themes may emerge in the terrorism and violent extremism landscape.

As terrorism and violent extremism are increasingly nurtured online, digital infrastructure and
communication technology further amplify these radicalisation processes. Encrypted messaging
apps, anonymous forums, algorithm-driven social media platforms and other modern
technologies still allow for the spread of propaganda and the circulation of ambiguous,
contradictory, or unstable ideas. This enables the creation of unique ideological frameworks that
are often largely dependent on the personal circumstances of the potential perpetrator. Mental
health challenges and other vulnerabilities heighten this risk: where resilience is low, extremist
and terrorist narratives are more likely to take hold. As digital and physical lives become more
intertwined, the likelihood of online radicalisation translating into real-world violence and
possible terrorist attacks continues to grow.

Additionally, these drivers contribute to the emergence of a broader range of actors who may
direct, enable or employ tactics resembling terrorist modi operandi. These may include hybrid
threat actors, criminal networks and individuals primarily motivated by a propensity for violence.
As some actors may steer or facilitate terrorist activity rather than carry it out directly, while
others may simultaneously engage in other forms of criminality, it may become increasingly
difficult to distinguish terrorism from other forms of violence or criminal conduct.



Future threats
The combined impact of these drivers is assessed as likely to play a critical role in shaping the
future terrorism and violent extremism landscape in the EU. Although they indicate significant
shifts in the threat environment, uncertainty remains regarding the ways in which these threats
will ultimately materialise.

Low-level terrorist attacks are likely to remain a persistent threat and may increase in frequency.
Their simple execution and limited planning requirements make them particularly challenging to
identify and disrupt. Jihadism remains likely to account for most terrorist attacks and arrests.



                                                                                                     45
                                                                         Europol Public Information

At the same time, the pool of potential perpetrators broadens as a growing diversity of ideologies
and actors mobilise individuals, while online environments facilitate the rapid, broad and secure
dissemination of terrorist narratives and operational knowledge.

Simultaneously, however, the interaction of the strategic context and several risk factors points
to the possibility of more complex or large-scale attacks. Returning foreign terrorist fighters,
together with individuals convicted of terrorism-related offences who are being released from
prison, could reintroduce actors with operational expertise and experience into the EU threat
landscape. Competition for notoriety, the gamification of violence and the pursuit of attention
within online extremist ecosystems, may incentivise individuals to plan more sophisticated and
high-impact attacks. Technological developments combined with the rapid dissemination of
technical knowledge, may also lower the barriers to more complex operations. Younger and
technologically adept perpetrators may pose a particular risk in this context. Finally, structured
and coherent organised terrorist groups continue to exist and may retain the resources,
coordination and intent required to carry out more complex attacks within the EU.

Terrorist propaganda is increasingly tailored to younger audiences and disseminated through the
same digital platforms and tools that are widely used by this demographic group.

While target selection is likely to remain relatively consistent with established patterns - including
attacks against civilians, specific communities or public spaces - there may be a growing shift
towards more random or opportunistic targeting. Such a development could reflect an increased
focus among certain actors on maximising psychological impact and societal disruption through
the creation of fear, uncertainty and insecurity.




                                                                                                   46
                                                                                 Europol Public Information



   ANNEXES
   Tables
   Terrorist attacks per outcome, as reported to Europol by EU Member States in
   2025
                                       Completed            Failed               Foiled                 Total
    Austria                                 1                   -                  6                      7
    Belgium                                 -                   -                  2                      2
    France                                  3                   -                  11                    14
    Germany                                 4                   -                   -                     4
    Greece                                  1                   1                   -                     2
    Ireland                                 1                   -                  1                      2
    Italy                                  10                   1                   -                    11
    Malta                                                       1                   -                     1
    Netherlands                             1                   -                   -                     1
    Spain                                   1                   -                   -                     1
    Total                                  22                   3                  20                    45




   Terrorist attacks (completed, failed and foiled) per type of terrorism, as
   reported to Europol by EU Member States in 2023-2025

                                                        2023                      2024                           2025
    Jihadist                                               14                       24                             24
    Right-wing                                              2                           1                          5
    Left-wing and anarchist                                32                       21                             12
    Ethno-nationalist and separatist                     7044                           4                           -
    Other and not specified                                 2                           8                          4

    Total                                                 120                       58                             45




44 These 70 separatist attacks were contributed by France in EU TE-SAT 2024. It should be noted that in EU TE-

SAT 2024, France reported data on ethno-nationalist and separatist attacks for the years 2021, 2022 and 2023.
Four attacks were carried out in 2021, 22 in 2022 and 44 in 2023.
                                                                                                              47
                                                                                 Europol Public Information


   Jihadist terrorist attacks, as reported to Europol by EU Member States in 2023–
   2025
                                                              2023                 2024                 2025
    Completed                                                    5                     6                    9
    Failed                                                        -                    -                     -
    Foiled                                                       9                    18                   15
    Total                                                       14                    24                   24



   Right-wing terrorist attacks, as reported to Europol by EU Member States in
   2023–2025
                                                              2023                 2024                 2025
    Completed                                                     -                    1                    1
    Failed                                                        -                    -                     -
    Foiled                                                       2                     -                    4
    Total                                                        2                     1                    5



   Left-wing and anarchist terrorist attacks, as reported to Europol by EU Member
   States in 2023–2025
                                                              2023                 2024                 2025
    Completed                                                   23                    17                   11
    Failed                                                       8                     4                    1
    Foiled                                                       1                     -                     -
    Total                                                       32                    21                   12



   Ethno-nationalist and separatist attacks, as reported to Europol by EU Member
   States in 2023–2025
                                                              2023                 2024                 2025
    Completed                                                   70                     4                     -
    Failed                                                        -                    -                     -
    Foiled                                                        -                    -                     -
    Total                                                      7045                    4                     -




45 These 70 separatist attacks were contributed by France in EU TE-SAT 2024. It should be noted that in TE-SAT

2024, France reported data on ethno-nationalist and separatist attacks for the years 2021, 2022 and 2023. Four
attacks were carried out in 2021, 22 in 2022 and 44 in 2023.
                                                                                                            48
                                                             Europol Public Information


Other/not specified terrorist attacks, as reported to Europol by EU Member
States in 2023–2025
                                         2023                2024                2025
 Completed                                   -                  6                   1
 Failed                                     1                   1                   2
 Foiled                                     1                   1                   1
 Total                                      2                   8                   4




Arrests for terrorist offence per type of terrorism per Member State, as
reported to Europol by EU Member States in 2023-2025

                                                      2023          2024         2025
 Jihadist                                             334            289          347
 Right-wing                                            26             47           43
 Left-wing and anarchist                               14             28           13
 Ethno-nationalist and separatist                      25             27           34
 Other and not specified                               27             58           49

 Total                                                426            449          486




                                                                                    49
                                                          Europol Public Information


Arrests for jihadist terrorist offences, as reported to Europol by EU Member
States in 2023–2025
                                          2023             2024               2025
 Austria                                    18               22                 40
 Belgium                                    67               25                 30
 Bulgaria                                    1                 -                  -
 Cyprus                                       -               8                  1
 Czechia                                      -               3                  6
 Denmark                                     1                1                  5
 Estonia                                      -                -                 1
 Finland                                      -               3                   -
 France                                     62               58                 64
 Germany                                    39               37                 21
 Greece                                      2                1                   -
 Hungary                                     1                1                   -
 Ireland                                     9                1                  4
 Italy                                      14               14                 26
 Latvia                                      1                2                   -
 Luxembourg                                  5                 -                  -
 Malta                                       9                3                   -
 Netherlands                                18               23                 40
 Poland                                      1                1                  2
 Portugal                                     -                -                 1
 Romania                                     2                1                  3
 Slovakia                                    1                 -                  -
 Spain                                      78               78                100
 Sweden                                      5                7                  3
 Total                                     334              289                347



Arrests for right-wing terrorist offences, as reported to Europol by EU Member
States in 2023–2025

                                          2023             2024               2025
 Belgium                                    12                2                  5
 Czechia                                     -                1                   -
 Denmark                                     -                1                   -
 Finland                                     2                -                   -
 France                                      4                8                  5
 Germany                                     1                8                  8
 Hungary                                     -                3                   -
 Ireland                                     1                -                  3
 Italy                                       4               15                  3
 Latvia                                      -                1                   -
 Netherlands                                 5                7                  8
 Poland                                      -                -                  4

                                                                                 50
                                                           Europol Public Information

 Portugal                                          -                 -            4
 Slovakia                                         2                 1              -
 Spain                                             -                 -            3
 Total                                           31                 47            43




Arrests for left-wing and anarchist terrorist offences, as reported to Europol by
EU Member States in 2023–2025

                                       2023               2024                 2025
 Belgium                                    -                   -                  1
 France                                     -                   -                  2
 Germany                                   1                    1                  -
 Greece                                    2                20                     1
 Italy                                     10                   6                  6
 Netherlands                                -                   -                  1
 Spain                                     1                    1                  2
 Total                                     14               28                    13



Arrests for ethno-nationalist and separatist terrorist offences, as reported to
Europol by EU Member States in 2023–2025

                                    2023                2024                   2025
 Finland                               -                   5                      3
 France                               11                    -                     7
 Germany                               1                   9                      5
 Greece                                1                    -                      -
 Ireland                               4                    -                     4
 Italy                                 6                  10                      13
 Spain                                 1                   3                      2
 Sweden                                1                    -                      -
 Total                                25                  27                      34



Arrests for other/not specified terrorist offences, as reported to Europol by EU
Member States in 2023–2025

                                                2023            2024           2025
 Belgium                                          4                  -             8
 Bulgaria                                         1                  -             -
 Czechia                                           -                 1             -
 Denmark                                           -                 3             -
 France                                           1                  3             6
 Germany                                          9                  -             3
 Greece                                           2                  -             -

                                                                                   51
                                                                                   Europol Public Information

    Hungary                                                        -                      2                    -
    Ireland                                                       1                       -                    -
    Italy                                                          -                   17                      -
    Lithuania                                                      -                      -                    3
    Luxembourg                                                     -                      -                    1
    Malta                                                          -                      1                    1
    Netherlands                                                   5                    10                     14
    Poland                                                         -                   12                      3
    Slovakia                                                       -                      1                    -
    Spain                                                         4                       8                   10
    Total                                                         27                   58                     49




   Number of convictions and acquittals for terrorist offences per EU MS in 2023,
   202446 and 202547, as reported to Eurojust
    Member State                                         2023                     2024                     2025
    Austria                                                 39                       64                     100
    Belgium                                                 67                       62                       33
    Bulgaria                                                  -                       1                        -
    Croatia                                                  1                        -                        3
    Czechia                                                   -                       2                        4
    Denmark                                                  5                       11                      448
    Estonia                                                   -                       -                        3
    Finland                                                  5                        3                        1
    France                                                  90                     133                      121
    Germany                                                 63                       54                       36
    Greece                                                   2                        -                       23
    Hungary                                                  4                       15                       31
    Italy                                                    5                       29                       31
    Latvia                                                    -                       1                        1
    Lithuania                                                 -                       -                        1
    Malta                                                     -                       -                        1
    Netherlands                                             46                       51                       52
    Poland                                                    -                       -                        1
    Portugal                                                  -                       2                        1
    Romania                                                  1                        -                        1
    Slovak Republic                                           -                       2                        -
    Spain                                                   29                       54                       51


46 The data for the previous years corresponds to the data reported in the respective EU TE-SAT reports.

47 Eurojust received contributions containing information on convictions and acquittals for terrorist offences in

2025 from the following EU Member States: Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Spain and Sweden. The numbers included in the statistics concern only concluded proceedings for terrorist
offences. It does not include proceedings for hate crime, racism or xenophobia.
48 The numbers for Denmark include final judgments only.


                                                                                                               52
                                                                     Europol Public Information

 Sweden                                         1                          1                   6
 Total                                       358                     485                     505




Number of convictions and acquittals in 2025 per EU Member State and per
type of terrorism, as reported to Eurojust
 Member State   Jihadist   Right wing           Ethno-    Left wing and        Other/Not    Total
                                        nationalist and        anarchist        specified
                                             separatist
 Austria             93             -                 2               3                2     100
 Belgium             29            4                  -                -                -     33
 Croatia               -           3                  -                -                -      3
 Czechia              1            1                 1                                 1       4
 Denmark              2            1                  -                -               1       4
 Estonia               -           3                  -                -                -      3
 Finland               -            -                1                 -                -      1
 France              96           24                  -                -               1     121
 Germany             24            5                 4                1                2      36
 Greece                -            -                 -              14                9      23
 Hungary               -            -                 -                -              31      31
 Italy               14            2                  -               4               11      31
 Latvia                -           1                  -                -                -      1
 Lithuania             -            -                 -                -               1       1
 Malta                1             -                 -                -                -      1
 Netherlands         19            5                  -                -              28      52
 Poland                -            -                 -                -               1       1
 Portugal              -           1                  -                -                -      1
 Romania              1             -                 -                -                -      1
 Spain               30             -               21                 -                -     51
 Sweden               6             -                 -                -                -      6
 Total              316           50                29               22               88     505




                                                                                                53
                                                                             Europol Public Information


Number of convictions and acquittals per EU Member State in 2025, as
reported to Eurojust
 Member State                       Convictions        Acquittals         Total          Acquittals In %
 Austria                                    81                19           100                     19%
 Belgium                                    32                 1            33                       3%
 Croatia                                     3                  -            3                       0%
 Czechia                                     4                  -            4                       0%
 Denmark                                     4                  -            4                       0%
 Estonia                                     3                  -            3                       0%
 Finland                                     1                  -            1                       0%
 France                                    114                 7           121                       6%
 Germany                                    34                 2            36                       6%
 Greece                                     17                 6            23                     27%
 Hungary                                    31                  -           31                       0%
 Italy                                      13                18            31                     58%
 Latvia                                      1                  -            1                       0%
 Lithuania                                   1                  -            1                       0%
 Malta                                       1                  -            1                       0%
 Netherlands                                24                28            52                     54%
 Poland                                      1                  -            1                       0%
 Portugal                                    1                  -            1                       0%
 Romania                                     1                  -            1                       0%
 Spain                                      36                15            51                     29%
 Sweden                                      3                 3             6                     50%
 Total                                     406                99           505                     20%




Number of convictions and acquittals per type of terrorism in 2025, as reported
to Eurojust
 Type of terrorism                           Convictions     Acquittals      Total      Convictions In %
 Jihadist                                           277             39            316              88%
 Right-wing                                          44              6            50               88%
 Ethno-nationalist and separatist                    22              7            29               76%
 Left-wing and anarchist                              9             13            22               41%
 Other/not specified                                 54             34            88               61%
 Total                                              406             99            505              80%




                                                                                                       54
                                                                             Europol Public Information


Amendments to national terrorism legislation in 2025
Bulgaria

The State Gazette, issue No 61 of 2025, published a Law Amending and Supplementing the
Criminal Code. This law introduces a completely new Chapter One A to the Bulgarian Criminal
Code, entitled ‘Terrorism’. The chapter consists of:

   •      Section 1 – Actual terrorist crimes (Articles 114a to 114i); and
   •      Section 2 – Non-actual terrorist crimes (Articles 114k to 114t).

All provisions of the new Chapter One A entered into force on 31 January 2026.
Furthermore, the Law Amending and Supplementing the Criminal Code introduces a legal
definition clarifying when an act is considered to be committed for terrorist purposes within the
meaning of the new Chapter One A. This definition is set out in Article 93(16) of the Criminal
Code.

Czechia

An amendment to the Criminal Code implemented by Act No 270/2025 Coll. reduced the
penalties for the crime of supporting and promoting terrorism under Section 312e of the Criminal
Code, as well as for the crime of threatening with a terrorist attack under Section 312f of the
Criminal Code.

The previous amendment set the penalty for these crimes at five to fifteen years if they were
committed through print, film, radio, television, a publicly accessible computer network, or other
similarly effective means. In practice, this meant that online statements approving terrorist
crimes or threats of terrorist attacks, even if not meant seriously, would be punishable by
unconditional prison sentences. The penalty has now been reduced to 3 to 12 years and allows
for the imposition of an alternative penalty not involving direct imprisonment, which is
particularly appropriate for people with no previous convictions. The penalties have not been
reduced for other more serious terrorist crimes, such as terrorist attacks, terrorism, participation
in a terrorist group, or terrorist financing.

Greece

Law No 5232/2025 was adopted to transpose Directive (EU) 2024/1226. It introduced significant
changes in the field of concealment and access to evidence, mainly focusing on the violation of
EU sanctions and the management of criminal case files. In addition, Article 205 of Law No
5187/2025 introduced a restrictive recast of Article 187C (Favourable measures) of the Greek
Criminal Code, without broadening its scope.

Hungary

Government Decree No 297/2025 (IX. 26.) on the State of Emergency Rules for Actions Against
Specific Persons and Organisations and Government Decree 465/2025. (XII.29.) on the National
List Against Terrorism, the Restrictive Measures Against the Listed Persons and the Effect Thereof
were issued. The former government decree provides for definition of the national terrorism list,
the procedure for inclusion on the list, the amendment thereof and the imposable sanctions.
Annex 1 to the latter government decree lists the terrorist groups, while Annex 2 includes the
restrictive measures against the listed entities.



                                                                                                    55
                                                                                     Europol Public Information

   In addition, the provisions of Act LII of 2017 on the Implementation of Financial and Asset-related
   Restrictive Measures Ordered by the European Union and the UN Security Council were
   amended. In line with the creation of the national terrorism list, the Act was supplemented by
   Sections 7/A-7/C, which contain the most important rules and provisions regarding the list –
   among them inclusion in the list, the rules of declaring someone a terrorist and the restrictive
   measures and the enforcement thereof [Sections 11-13 of Act CXXV of 2025].

   Most of the new provisions entered into force on 1 January 2026.

   Italy

   Legislative Decree No. 48 of 11 April 2025, converted into Law No. 80 of 9 June 2025 (Security
   Decree), came into force on 12 April 2025. It introduced Article 270-quinquies.3 of the Criminal
   Code Possession of material for the purpose of terrorism, which punishes with imprisonment for
   two to six years anyone who, outside the cases referred to in Articles 270-bis and 270-quinquies,
   knowingly obtains or possesses material containing instructions on the preparation or use of
   lethal warfare devices referred to in Article 1, first paragraph, of Law No. 110 of 18 April 1975,
   firearms or other weapons or harmful or dangerous chemical or bacteriological substances, as
   well as any other technique or method for carrying out acts of violence or sabotage of essential
   public services, for the purpose of terrorism, even if directed against a foreign state, an
   institution or an international organisation.

   Legislative Decree No. 95 of 30 June 2025, which entered into force on 10 August 2025,
   converted with amendments into Law No. 118 of 8 August 2025, amended Italian anti-money
   laundering legislation (Legislative Decree No. 231/2007) and the measures to combat terrorist
   financing (Legislative Decree No 109/2007), imposing new responsibilities, particularly for the
   non-profit sector. Among the various measures introduced, Article 11 contains supplementary
   and corrective provisions for the prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing. The
   Decree amends the following legislative acts:

   1. Decree No 109/2007, which establishes measures to prevent, counter and suppress terrorist
      financing and the activities of countries that threaten international peace and security,
      pursuant to Directive 2005/60/EC. Accordingly, the Financial Security Committee ("Csf") is
      designated as the central point of contact for requests from foreign states and international
      organisations regarding the risk of terrorist financing of third sector entities (pursuant to
      Article 4 of Legislative Decree No 117/2017, Third Sector Code).

   2. Decree No 231/2007, which transposes the same Directive with reference to the prevention
      of the use of the financial system for the purposes of money laundering and terrorist
      financing, as well as Directive 2006/70/EC which contains implementing measures. The
      definition of financing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is clarified, referring
      to the provisions of Legislative Decree No 109/2007. The Minister of Economy and Finance
      has been granted powers – following consultation with the Csf - to identify high-risk
      countries, in addition to those already designated by the European Commission, pursuant to
      Article 4 (4-bis) of Legislative Decree No 231/2007. The role of the CSF in the national risk
      analysis associated with the financing of the proliferation of ‘weapons of mass destruction’49
      has also been strengthened. This is achieved through three-yearly and extraordinary updates,
      to be made available to obligated entities for more effective risk management.




49 Understood as the risk of failure to apply, and the evasion of, targeted financial sanctions.


                                                                                                            56
                                                      Europol Public Information



LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AI       Artificial Intelligence
AQ       Al-Qaeda
AQAP     Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
CBRNE    Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear Explosives
CSAM     Child Sexual Abuse Material
CT       Counter Terrorism
DDOS     Distributed Denial of Service
DHKP-C   The Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party/Front (Devrimci Halk
         Kurtulus Partisi/Cephesi
E2EE     End-to-end Encryption
ECTC     European Counter Terrorism Centre
ESOCC    European Serious Organised Crime Centre
EU       European Union
EU IRU   European Union Internet Referral Unit
FLNC     Fronte di Liberazione Naziunale Corsu
FTF      Foreign Terrorist Fighters
GCC      Ghjuventù Clandestina Corsa
HSP      Hosting Service Provider
HTS      Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham
IED      Improvised Explosive Device
IID      Improvised Incendiary Device
IRA      Irish Republican Army
IS       Islamic State
ISKP     Islamic State Khorasan Province
ISSP     Islamic State Sahel Province
ISWAP    Islamic State West Africa Province
JNIM     Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam wa al-Muslimin
LEAs     Law Enforcement Authorities
LLM      Large Language Model
MS       Member States
NATO     North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
PKK      Kurdistan Workers’ Party/Partiva Karkerên Kurdistanê
RAD      Referral Action Days
TCO      Terrorist Content Online
UAVs     Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
VPN      Virtual Private Network

                                                                             57
                                          Europol Public Information




Your feedback matters.
By clicking on the following link or scanning the embedded QR
code you can fill in a short user survey on the received
strategic report.

Your input will help us further improve our products.

https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/eus_strategic_reports




                                                                 58
