AARO Home
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
Official websites use .mil
A .mil website belongs to an official U.S. Department of Defense organization in the United States.
Secure .mil websites use HTTPS
A lock ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .mil website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Skip to main content (Press Enter).
FY24 Report
New Director Dr. Jon Kosloski
Analysis of a Metallic Specimen
Read the Eglin UAP Case Resolution
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) KONA BLUE Information Release
Read the AARO Historical Record Report: Volume 1
Read UAP Records from NARA
Welcome to the website for the All-domain Anomaly Resolution Office (AARO). Our team of experts is leading the U.S. government’s efforts to address Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena (UAP) using a rigorous scientific framework and a data-driven approach. Since its establishment in July 2022, AARO has taken important steps to improve data collection, standardize reporting requirements, and mitigate the potential threats to safety and security posed by UAP. We look forward to using this site to regularly update the public about AARO’s work and findings, and to provide a mechanism for UAP reporting. Thank you for visiting.
INTRODUCTION TO UAP
What is a UAP?
Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena (UAP) means (A) airborne objects that are not immediately identifiable; (B) transmedium objects or devices; (C) and submerged objects or devices that are not immediately identifiable and that display behavior or performance characteristics suggesting that the objects or devices may be related to the objects or devices described in subparagraph (A) or (B). (Per the NDAA FY23 Section 1673(d)(8)) .
The DoD considers Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena (UAP) as sources of anomalous detections in one or more domain (i.e., airborne, seaborne, spaceborne, and/or transmedium) that are not yet attributable to known actors and that demonstrate behaviors that are not readily understood by sensors or observers.
“Anomalous detections” include but are not limited to phenomena that demonstrate apparent capabilities or material that exceed known performance envelopes. A UAP may consist of one or more unidentified anomalous objects and may persist over an extended period of time.
Has the Department found any evidence of extraterrestrial technology?
No. Examination of UAP sightings is ongoing. AARO uses a rigorous scientific framework and data-driven approach to better understand UAP. We will follow the science wherever it leads.
How can I share information with AARO or report a UAP?
Military personnel should report through their command or service in accordance with GENADMIN Joint Staff J3 Washington DC 191452ZMAY23 “Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena Reporting and Material Disposition."
Civilian pilots are encouraged to promptly report UAP sightings to air traffic control. AARO receives UAP-related Pilot Reports (PIREPs) from the Federal Aviation Administration.
General public - We will announce when a reporting mechanism is available for others to use.
What are the leading explanations to account for UAP reports?
No single explanation addresses the majority of UAP reports. We are collecting as much data as possible, following the data where it leads, and sharing our findings whenever possible. We will not rush to conclusions in our analysis. In many cases, observed phenomena are classified as ‘unidentified’ simply because sensors were not able to collect enough information to make a positive attribution.
What are some common objects/causes frequently reported as UAP?
Common objects/causes frequently reported as UAP include:
- Airborne clutter
- Commercial or scientific balloons
- Commercial or military aircraft
- Unmanned aerial vehicles (i.e., drones)
- Space launches
- Satellites
- Celestial objects
Quick Links
UAP Imagery
UAP Records
Congressional/Press
Products
Submit A Report
FAQ