Pentagon's AARO quietly held an invite-only workshop to help shape the future of UAP research | DefenseScoop
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Advertise
Search for:
Search
Advertisement
Subscribe to our daily newsletter.
Subscribe
Close
Approximately 40 government, academic, and independent researchers met at a private workshop last year to standardize processes for capturing, sharing and studying narrative data on unidentified anomalous phenomena ( UAP ), which is the modern term for UFOs that accounts for maritime and transmedium objects.
The Pentagon’s All-domain Anomaly Resolution Office ( AARO ) set up and sponsored the invite-only event. It was officially hosted by Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI) in the Washington, D.C. area in early August.
The 2025 workshop marked a notable step in the U.S. government’s efforts to prioritize a more interactive ecosystem for high-stakes UAP research , and the Defense Department is eyeing more engagements like it down the line.
“Recognizing that input from the scientific and academic community is critical to its work, AARO hopes to convene future workshops and collaborative opportunities, as needed, to foster an interdisciplinary community for UAP analysis,” Pentagon spokesperson Sue Gough told DefenseScoop on Monday.
Advertisement
Contemporary UAP reports are difficult to integrate and analyze, as they stem from diverse sources — like military and pilot logs, archival records, civilian testimony and social media — that are typically inconsistent in metadata, format and terminology.
In a whitepaper published online by AARO last month, officials wrote that the “workshop centered on the collection, organization, and interpretation of UAP reports, with attention to the challenges and opportunities of working with narrative data.”
Participant privacy was a prime consideration and DOD did not publish a full list of those who went or information about the meet-up ahead of time. Attendees had to cover their own travel costs to get to the workshop, but lodging expenses and most meals were paid for by the office.
“We expect this to be a groundbreaking workshop and meaningful gathering of minds that will help to shape the future of UAP research,” AARO’s invitation letter to select candidates read.
Casual networking opportunities, more formal presentations and panel discussions, and prompt-based breakout sessions unfolded over the two-day event .
Advertisement
The agenda and activities were designed to help participants explore best practices for collecting and storing narrative data associated with UAP sightings, and determine methods to integrate that data from disparate organizations and apply AI to large-scale datasets for pattern recognition and other purposes.
According to AARO’s 17-page whitepaper, the workshop sparked multiple “cross-cutting findings.”
“First, effective progress requires clear standards and common reporting templates, with robust metadata capturing time, location, provenance, morphology, and contextual details. Second, linking across datasets — military and civilian, to include archival, environmental, and technical — must balance interoperability with privacy, ethical, and classification constraints. Third, credibility is best assessed through corroboration, but for efficiency there is a need for automated methods to filter reports and surface the most promising for investigation,” officials wrote. “Fourth, AI and machine learning tools offer capacity for transcription, triage, clustering, and semantic search, but they must be deployed cautiously to avoid hallucination, bias, and amplification of hoaxes. Human oversight and iterative workflows remain essential. Finally, the workshop underscored the importance of community engagement and trust-building, encouraging the scientific community to cultivate a sustainable ‘community of practice’ for UAP research with further work and convenings.”
Collectively, those results and recommendations point toward a multi-disciplinary approach to UAP narrative data that AARO suggested “may influence how and where technical sensors are deployed.”
The office is responsible for deploying a new sensor suite to help the military detect and track UAP in the field.
Advertisement
Gough told DefenseScoop on Monday that AARO did not have additional workshops or plans to announce.
Share
Facebook
LinkedIn
Twitter
Copy Link
Add to Preferred Sources
Advertisement
Advertisement
More Like This
Advertisement
Top Stories
Advertisement
More Scoops
A UFO variety was photographed when it hovered for fifteen minutes near Holloman Air Development Center in New Mexico. The object was photographed by a government employee and was released by the Aerial Phenomena Research Organization after careful study. (Credit: Bettmann via Getty Images)
Screenshot of AARO logo from opening slide of Jon Kosloski’s unclassified presentation at an open congressional hearing on Nov. 19, 2024.
Abraham (Avi) Loeb is the Frank B. Baird, Jr., Professor of Science at Harvard University. (Photo by: Lotem Loeb, May 22, 2026; shared by Avi Loeb.)
Latest Podcasts
How the Navy is reducing workforce friction to improve mission outcomes
How DARPA is looking to AI to fend off cyber vulnerabilities through a challenge program
How the DOD protects national security interests by monitoring climate change
Brandi Vincent: Behind-the-byline of one of the Pentagon’s top tech reporters
Tech
III Armored Corps receiving baseline NGC2 capabilities
Africom’s new Defense Economics Office set up to drive outsized security returns
LaNeve tells soldiers that decision to revert experimental drone unit back to infantry roots predated his tenure as acting Army chief
Pentagon taps USNDA to head its ‘Top Drone’ competitions
Joint Chiefs chairman says U.S. forces must prepare to be ‘hunted’ by autonomous systems
Pentagon sets procedures for AI-assisted software development
DOD poised to move all classified AI workloads off Anthropic by October
Decades of delayed maintenance has left Pentagon networks in ‘potential peril’ for the AI age, cyber defense commander says: ‘no more.’
Weapons
Pentagon unveils top performers in latest ‘Gauntlet’ for Drone Dominance Program
USAFE boss shares ‘vignettes’ for CCA drone employment in Europe
Army inks $1.2B contract with Lockheed for Precision Strike Missile that can hit ships and other moving targets
AFSOC gunship launches new Havoc Spear cruise missiles at targets in Africa during combat operations
Cyber
AAFES investigating ‘suspicious' messages sent to military customers through email and store’s official app
Pentagon pores over heaps of industry feedback on CMMC reform
Sonu Shankar appointed as Pentagon principal deputy CIO
Navy secretary warns of ‘coordinated, multi-domain’ campaign against personnel and installations
Advertisement
Close Ad
Continue to DefenseScoop