Pentagon eyes ‘treatments and countermeasures’ as it reshapes AHI cross-functional team | DefenseScoop
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Advertise
Search for:
Search
Advertisement
Subscribe to our daily newsletter.
Subscribe
Close
The Pentagon team coordinating work to support personnel who have suddenly experienced disruptive sensory, neurological, and cognitive ailments possibly sparked by adversarial technologies was recently realigned from the policy directorate to the undersecretariat for research and engineering.
Key questions about this move remain unanswered in its early aftermath.
But the shift is expected to enable the group, known as the Anomalous Health Incidents Cross-Functional Team, to more quickly translate its findings into remedies and antidotes to neutralize the modern health threats, according to a source familiar with the restructure plan.
“This realignment to a technically-grounded organization restores rigorous discipline and accelerates the integration of research into tangible medical treatments and countermeasures,” the Pentagon official told DefenseScoop Tuesday.
Advertisement
In 2016, U.S. diplomatic, military, and intelligence personnel and their family members started to report suffering from mysterious, often debilitating symptoms including intense ear pain, vertigo, headaches, dizziness, hearing and memory loss, visual disturbances and more.
Some observers call these unexplained health effects “Havana syndrome,” while the Defense Department and other federal agencies officially refer to them as “anomalous health incidents” (AHIs).
The first incidents came from a cluster of government employees assigned to the U.S. embassy in Havana, Cuba. But staff operating in the U.S., Russia, Serbia, Vietnam, India, Colombia, France, Taiwan and other nations have recorded similar complications.
Congress passed multiple AHI-related health care provisions in the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 2022, following mounting public pressure and surging reports. Among them was a mandate for DOD to set up a “cross-functional team” to address national security challenges posed by AHIs and help ensure victims receive proper care and support .
Initially, the group fell under the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.
Advertisement
DOD officials announced in a press release last week that the team was recently transitioned into the R&E directorate. The realignment “reflects the mission’s increasing scope, complexity, and technical focus, ensuring the CFT has the expert oversight needed to meet current and future challenges,” officials wrote.
Rear Adm. Michael J. Thornton, a triple‑board‑certified physician who was also a Navy SEAL, was selected to serve as the military assistant to the AHI CFT under the leadership of Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Critical Technologies Peter Highnam, per the release.
“The health of our warfighters and civilians is a top priority for the department, and this realignment strengthens our unwavering commitment,” a Pentagon official told DefenseScoop. “This transition is both strategic and deliberate, aimed at protecting the mission’s integrity and, most importantly, delivering answers to those affected by AHI.”
As reports of AHIs emerged over the last decade, experts suggested that microwave weapons or directed-energy devices could be potential sources. But to date, the precise overarching cause is unclear.
Based on a yearslong study, five intelligence agencies concluded in 2024 that a foreign adversary was most likely not behind most AHI reports. Those results were rejected by some lawmakers, and are now reportedly under review by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.
CBS reported in January that the U.S. government purchased a device that might be connected to AHIs, with Pentagon funding during the final weeks of the Biden administration in 2024.
Advertisement
The Pentagon official did not address questions from DefenseScoop Tuesday regarding whether the recent CFT’s realignment demonstrates a shift in DOD’s priorities to focus on weaponizing technologies responsible for AHI effects.
“This move ensures we can better protect those impacted, and our commitment to this work — and to the people waiting for answers — is absolute,” the official said.
Earlier this month, a bipartisan pair of lawmakers penned a formal letter to DOD leaders requesting that Congress members be consulted ahead of any major CFT reorganization efforts. It’s unclear if the Pentagon briefed them or other stakeholders on its plans before initiating the move.
The Pentagon official did not share details about when the team last informed lawmakers of its latest findings, or if the realignment resulted in a change in the group’s staff size and budget.
Share
Facebook
LinkedIn
Twitter
Copy Link
Add to Preferred Sources
Advertisement
Advertisement
More Like This
Advertisement
Top Stories
Advertisement
More Scoops
Flags of Cuba and the United States fly outside the US Embassy along the Malecon in Havana on June 18, 2026. (Photo by Pablo PORCIUNCULA / AFP via Getty Images)
Department of Defense Inspector General Platte B. Moring III and senior leadership from the office’s criminal investigative arm met recently with Colin M. McDonald, the Department of Justice’s first-ever Assistant Attorney General for the National Fraud Enforcement Division. (DOD OIG PHOTO)
A view of the entrance of White Sands Missile Range where Trinity test site is located, near White Sands, New Mexico on February 21, 2024. (Photo by VALERIE MACON/AFP via Getty Images)
Latest Podcasts
How the Navy is reducing workforce friction to improve mission outcomes
How DARPA is looking to AI to fend off cyber vulnerabilities through a challenge program
How the DOD protects national security interests by monitoring climate change
Brandi Vincent: Behind-the-byline of one of the Pentagon’s top tech reporters
Tech
III Armored Corps receiving baseline NGC2 capabilities
Africom’s new Defense Economics Office set up to drive outsized security returns
LaNeve tells soldiers that decision to revert experimental drone unit back to infantry roots predated his tenure as acting Army chief
Pentagon taps USNDA to head its ‘Top Drone’ competitions
Joint Chiefs chairman says U.S. forces must prepare to be ‘hunted’ by autonomous systems
Pentagon sets procedures for AI-assisted software development
DOD poised to move all classified AI workloads off Anthropic by October
Decades of delayed maintenance has left Pentagon networks in ‘potential peril’ for the AI age, cyber defense commander says: ‘no more.’
Weapons
Pentagon unveils top performers in latest ‘Gauntlet’ for Drone Dominance Program
USAFE boss shares ‘vignettes’ for CCA drone employment in Europe
Army inks $1.2B contract with Lockheed for Precision Strike Missile that can hit ships and other moving targets
AFSOC gunship launches new Havoc Spear cruise missiles at targets in Africa during combat operations
Cyber
AAFES investigating ‘suspicious' messages sent to military customers through email and store’s official app
Pentagon pores over heaps of industry feedback on CMMC reform
Sonu Shankar appointed as Pentagon principal deputy CIO
Navy secretary warns of ‘coordinated, multi-domain’ campaign against personnel and installations
Advertisement
Close Ad
Continue to DefenseScoop