Pentagon disburses Havana Syndrome compensation, rebrands team focused on ‘Directed Energy Bio-Effects’ | DefenseScoop
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Advertise
Search for:
Search
Advertisement
Subscribe to our daily newsletter.
Subscribe
Close
The Defense Department has paid out millions of dollars to personnel affected by so-called Havana Syndrome and renamed a key cross-functional team as the Directed Energy Bio-Effects CFT to investigate associated issues, the Pentagon announced Friday.
According to a press release, the disbursements were the first payments associated with the 2021 HAVANA Act made under any presidential administration. The release did not say how many individuals have received compensation thus far.
The term “Havana Syndrome” emerged after U.S. government personnel and their family members began reporting mysterious, often debilitating symptoms including intense ear pain, vertigo, headaches, dizziness, hearing and memory loss, visual disturbances and more in 2016. The first incidents were reported by officials who were stationed at the U.S. Embassy in Havana, Cuba, hence the origin of the name.
Some experts and lawmakers have suggested that these health problems resulted from secretive attacks by a foreign power that used directed energy systems, also known as “non-kinetic” capabilities, targeted at American officials overseas.
Advertisement
Following a congressional directive, the Pentagon set up a cross-functional team focused on addressing issues associated with these “anomalous health incidents” (AHI). The team first fell under the purview of the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, but earlier this year the department announced that it had been put under the Research and Engineering directorate, with a focus on treatments and countermeasures .
Last year, the Pentagon announced that it had started reviewing applications for one-time payments from personnel seeking financial compensation for brain health issues associated with the phenomenon.
“The Department is fully meeting Congressional intent regarding non-kinetic threats by applying a more dedicated warfighter and medical focus to this mission and expanding collaboration with interagency partners to coordinate vital research efforts. The Department is prioritizing the care of affected personnel and has disbursed nearly $3 million in compensation, representing the first HAVANA Act payments made under any presidential administration,” officials wrote in a July 10 press release.
Amid the rebranding of the AHI cross-functional team as the Directed Energy Bio-Effect CFT, the group “continues to facilitate the multifaceted implementation of enduring processes, procedures, and capabilities,” per the release.
The new name suggests that the Pentagon will be focusing heavily on directed energy devices as a potential cause of health problems like those associated with Havana Syndrome.
Advertisement
“The Department of War’s commitment to mitigating non-kinetic threats remains absolute,” officials wrote in the press release, using the Trump administration’s preferred name for the Department of Defense.
Share
Facebook
LinkedIn
Twitter
Copy Link
Add to Preferred Sources
Advertisement
Advertisement
More Like This
Advertisement
Top Stories
Advertisement
More Scoops
Healthcare and medicine research laboratory. (Getty Images)
(Photo credit: DOD / Lisa Ferdinando)
(Getty Images)
Latest Podcasts
How the Navy is reducing workforce friction to improve mission outcomes
How DARPA is looking to AI to fend off cyber vulnerabilities through a challenge program
How the DOD protects national security interests by monitoring climate change
Brandi Vincent: Behind-the-byline of one of the Pentagon’s top tech reporters
Tech
III Armored Corps receiving baseline NGC2 capabilities
Africom’s new Defense Economics Office set up to drive outsized security returns
LaNeve tells soldiers that decision to revert experimental drone unit back to infantry roots predated his tenure as acting Army chief
Pentagon taps USNDA to head its ‘Top Drone’ competitions
Joint Chiefs chairman says U.S. forces must prepare to be ‘hunted’ by autonomous systems
Pentagon sets procedures for AI-assisted software development
DOD poised to move all classified AI workloads off Anthropic by October
Decades of delayed maintenance has left Pentagon networks in ‘potential peril’ for the AI age, cyber defense commander says: ‘no more.’
Weapons
Pentagon unveils top performers in latest ‘Gauntlet’ for Drone Dominance Program
USAFE boss shares ‘vignettes’ for CCA drone employment in Europe
Army inks $1.2B contract with Lockheed for Precision Strike Missile that can hit ships and other moving targets
AFSOC gunship launches new Havoc Spear cruise missiles at targets in Africa during combat operations
Cyber
AAFES investigating ‘suspicious' messages sent to military customers through email and store’s official app
Pentagon pores over heaps of industry feedback on CMMC reform
Sonu Shankar appointed as Pentagon principal deputy CIO
Navy secretary warns of ‘coordinated, multi-domain’ campaign against personnel and installations
Advertisement
Close Ad
Continue to DefenseScoop