UNCLASSIFIED

ICA 2023-02286-B

1 March 2023

Updated Assessment of Anomalous Health Incidents

This Intelligence Community Assessment was prepared under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer (NIO) for Counterintelligence. It was drafted by the
National Intelligence Council with contributions from the Intelligence Community.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Updated Assessment of Anomalous Health Incidents
ICA 2023-02286-B

1 March 2023

Scope Note: This IC-coordinated Intelligence Community Assessment addresses the question of whether one or more foreign actors
bears responsibility, either deliberately or unintentionally, for causing anomalous health incidents (AHIs) reported by US
Government officials across multiple agencies since 2016. The ICA was written in response to senior US policymaker interest and
updates the IC’s previous assessment on AHIs published in January 2022.
Since US officials first reported AHIs in Havana, Cuba in late 2016, the IC has sought to understand whether these
events can be attributed to a foreign actor and a deliberate external mechanism. The IC pursued three separate lines of
inquiry: the first encompassed work determining whether available data points to the involvement of a foreign
adversary in the incidents; the second focused on the feasibility and existence of deliberate mechanisms that an
adversary might use against US personnel to cause AHIs; and the third evaluated whether medical analysis can help
determine if an outside actor is involved in the broad range of phenomena and symptoms associated with AHIs. Based
on the results of these three lines of inquiry, most IC agencies have concluded that it is “very unlikely” a foreign
adversary is responsible for the reported AHIs. IC agencies have varying confidence levels, with two agencies at
moderate-to-high confidence while three are at moderate confidence. Two agencies judge it is “unlikely” an
adversary was responsible for AHIs and they do so with low confidence based on collection gaps and their review
of the same evidence.
 Five agencies judge that available intelligence consistently points against the involvement of US adversaries in
causing the reported incidents. Agencies employed an array of collection and investigative efforts that spanned
hundreds of reported incidents—within the United States and abroad—and explored a range of potential
indicators of hostile activity, from identifying suspicious persons near incident sites to searching for a pattern
among affected personnel. These efforts could not identify an adversary as being responsible for any incident and
in some key cases, IC agencies and partners had comprehensive information on the location where an AHI
occurred but found no evidence of adversary activity. Most IC agencies judge it is very unlikely a foreign
adversary played a role, although confidence in the judgment related to this line of inquiry varies, with two
agencies having moderate-to-high confidence; three agencies having moderate confidence; and one agency
abstaining. One agency judges it is only unlikely a foreign adversary played a role and has only low confidence in
this judgment. This reflects its view that the evidence is less compelling because the IC has failed to detect some
adversaries’ activities.
 A review of intelligence reporting, open-source information, and scientific and medical literature about foreign
weapons and research programs, as well as engagement with researchers inside and outside the US Government
have led IC agencies to judge that there is no credible evidence that a foreign adversary has a weapon or
collection device that is causing AHIs. As a result, most agencies assess that deliberate causal mechanisms are
very unlikely to have caused the sensory phenomena and adverse symptoms associated with AHIs but with
varying confidence levels. Two agencies have high confidence in this judgment while three agencies have
moderate confidence. Two agencies judge that deliberate causal mechanisms are unlikely to have caused AHIs
and have low confidence because they judge that radiofrequency (RF) energy is a plausible cause for AHIs, based
in part on the findings of the IC Expert Panel and the results of research by some US laboratories. All agencies
acknowledge the value of additional research on potential adversary capabilities in the RF field, in part because
[1]
UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

there continues to be a scientific debate on whether this could result in a weapon that could produce the
symptoms seen in some of the reported AHI cases.
 IC agencies assess that medical analysis of AHIs has evolved since the first reported incidents in ways that point
away from adversary involvement. While initial medical studies concluded AHIs represented a novel medical
syndrome or consistent pattern of injuries similar to traumatic brain injury (TBI), a combination of medical and
academic critiques pointed to methodological limitations in that work. Furthermore, the JASON panel’s review
of preliminary data from a National Institutes of Health (NIH) longitudinal study on AHIs in 2021 does not
convey a consistent set of physical injuries, including neurologic injuries such as TBI. This shift is notable
because the initial medical opinions formed a central part of the IC hypothesis that US personnel had sustained
injuries that were unlikely to be explained by natural or environmental factors and shaped the IC’s approach to
AHIs. Medical research is ongoing but currently appears consistent with the conclusions emerging from the IC’s
analysis of foreign involvement and potential causal mechanisms. Five agencies have moderate confidence in this
judgment while one agency abstains. One agency has low confidence because the NIH findings have yet to be
published.
As part of its review, the IC identified critical assumptions surrounding the initial AHIs reported in Cuba from 2016 to
2018, which framed the IC’s understanding of this phenomenon, but were not borne out by subsequent medical and
technical analysis. In light of this and the evidence that points away from a foreign adversary, causal mechanism, or
unique syndrome linked to AHIs, IC agencies assess that symptoms reported by US personnel were probably the result
of factors that did not involve a foreign adversary, such as preexisting conditions, conventional illnesses, and
environmental factors. IC confidence in this explanation is bolstered by the fact that we identified medical,
environmental, and social factors that plausibly can explain many AHIs reported by US officials. Three agencies have
high confidence in this portion of the assessment while three other agencies have moderate confidence. One agency
has low confidence because it judges that it is unclear how many reported incidents were influenced by dynamics not
directly related to adversary activity such as hypervigilance. All IC agencies agree that US personnel sincerely and
honestly reported their experiences, including those that were painful or traumatic, particularly given the framing of
AHIs as possible attacks by an unknown mechanism that could cause permanent harm such as brain damage.
The IC considered a range of other possibilities we deemed less likely, and identified types of information that, if
found, would prompt us to revisit our assessment, such as new medical analysis that identified a syndrome linked to
affected personnel or the identification of a specific device that both caused the harmful effects described in AHI reports
and was fielded by an adversary during the timeframe of the incidents.

[2]
UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

