Norfolk and Suffolk US airbase drones 'from Russia shadow fleet'
Skip to content
Site search
Home
News
Sport
Business
Technology
Health
Culture
Arts
Travel
Earth
Audio
Video
Live
Weather
Newsletters
Drones over bases 'likely from Russia shadow fleet'
3 July 2026 Share Save Add as preferred on Google
Owen Sennit Norfolk
Contributed/BBC
RAF Lakenheath is home to the USAF's 48th Fighter Wing, aka the Liberty Wing
Swarms of drones that flew over three air bases in Norfolk and Suffolk were likely launched from Russia's shadow fleet of cargo ships, according to experts.
Unmanned aerial vehicles were spotted over RAF Lakenheath and RAF Mildenhall in Suffolk and RAF Feltwell in Norfolk in November 2024, sparking a major alert.
An inquiry by the Ministry of Defence Police failed to identify any suspects.
But an investigation by The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), a think tank, said the unmanned aerial vehicles were likely launched from Russian-linked commercial vessels in the North Sea.
Bob Jones/Geograph
Drones were spotted flying over RAF Feltwell in Norfolk in November 2024
The report by the IISS said about 170 sightings were reported between 20 and 26 November in 2024 over the three air bases, which are all used by the United States Air Force (USAF).
The drones entered the air bases at low altitude with their lights visible and departed at higher altitudes, the report continued.
There were swarms of up to 20 drones at a time and some were said to be flying low over runway approaches.
More from Norfolk
Boaters 'marooned' in the Broads as bridges fail
Hospital investigates death during heatwave
Bud-wei-ser, Cadbury and Yellow Pages: How many adverts can you remember?
At the time, the USAF announced that "small unmanned aerial systems continue to be spotted" in the vicinity of the air bases.
A police helicopter sent to investigate reported a near-miss with what was later identified as a US F-15 fighter jet.
Despite the sightings, no verified footage of the drones around the bases has emerged – at least, not in the public domain.
NPAS
A police helicopter reported a near-miss with a drone which was subsequently identified as an F-15 jet. The incident was captured by an on-board camera
The IISS report said that "by coincidence", the Hav Dolphin, a cargo vessel sailing under the flag of Antigua and Barbuda and suspected of carrying Russian spy drones, was docked near Hull in the Humber estuary at the time.
Another Russian-linked vessel, the Seasons 1 tanker, was also in the North Sea near Essex.
The surveillance campaign also targeted RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire and sites in France, Belgium and the Netherlands, researchers said.
The IISS said it believes the current architecture used to defend against unauthorised drones "does not yet match the threat" posed by Russia, and that the Kremlin's campaign is "exploiting the gap between what European militaries could do and what their governments were prepared to authorise."
Matt Precey/BBC
New powers will allow personnel to shoot down drones over airbases
Following the incident, the Ministry of Defence said it was spending £4bn on boosting drone capabilities and over £1bn on strengthening integrated air and missile defences protecting the UK.
"New powers introduced this year authorised personnel to take down drones deemed to pose a threat to any defence site in the UK," it said.
Do you have a story suggestion for Norfolk? Contact us below.
Follow Norfolk news on BBC Sounds , Facebook , Instagram and X .
More on this story Airbases drone inquiry ends without any suspects
Mystery drones seen over three US air bases in UK
Foreign powers or phantom menace? Mystery of the air base drone sightings
Related internet links Ministry of Defence
International Institute for Strategic Studies
Lakenheath Royal Air Force Base
Feltwell
Mildenhall Royal Air Force Base
Ministry of Defence
US Armed Forces
Russia-UK relations
Hull
Related
Archive will preserve stories of black US airmen
'I was one of 85 pilots who flew a US spy plane'
Minister to raise airman strangulation case with US
More from the BBC
4 hrs ago
Post-war apartments to be demolished
Hull City Council says it is "financially unviable" to renovate Henson Villas in Pearson Park.
4 hrs ago
4 hrs ago
Mayor's plan to extend free bus pass scheme
Currently, pensioners must wait until 09:30 to use their concessionary pass in the East Riding.
4 hrs ago
1 day ago
Thousands raised after ball breaks stained glass
Hull Minster has raised more than £16,000 through crowdfunding for repairs to the windows.
1 day ago
1 day ago
Why some charity donations do more harm than good
From mouldy books to dirty boots, charities are spending large sums on binning unsellable items.
1 day ago
1 day ago
Eight US sailors assigned to USS Abraham Lincoln attempted suicide, Navy says
In a letter to Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, acting Navy Secretary Hung Cao said the crew had adequate mental health support during the long deployment.
1 day ago