Mystery drones seen over three US air bases in East Anglia
Skip to content
Site search
Home
News
Sport
Business
Technology
Health
Culture
Arts
Travel
Earth
Audio
Video
Live
Weather
Newsletters
Mystery drones seen over three US air bases in UK
23 November 2024 Share Save Add as preferred on Google
Contributed/BBC
RAF Lakenheath is home to the USAF's 48th Fighter Wing, aka the Liberty Wing
A number of unidentified drones have been spotted over three airbases in Britain, the United States Air Force (USAF) has confirmed.
The incidents, which occurred between Wednesday and Friday, saw "small unmanned aerial systems" spotted over RAF Lakenheath and RAF Mildenhall, in Suffolk, and RAF Feltwell in the neighbouring county of Norfolk.
The USAF, which uses the bases, said it was unclear at this stage whether the drones were considered hostile.
It also declined to comment on whether any defence mechanisms were used, but said it retained "the right to protect" installations.
Mike Page Aerial Photogrpahy
RAF Mildenhall in Suffolk is home to the USAF's refuelling wing in Europe
A spokesperson for USAF in Europe said: "We can confirm that small unmanned aerial systems [UASs] were spotted in the vicinity of and over RAF Lakenheath, RAF Mildenhall and RAF Feltwell.
"The number of UASs fluctuated and they ranged in size/configuration.
"The UASs were actively monitored and installation leaders determined that none of the incursions impacted base residents or critical infrastructure.
"To protect operational security, we do not discuss our specific force protection measures but retain the right to protect the installation.
"We continue to monitor our airspace and are working with host-nation authorities and mission partners to ensure the safety of base personnel, facilities and assets."
RAF Mildenhall is primarily home to the USAF's 100th Air Refueling Wing; RAF Lakenheath is home to USAF F-35A and F-15E fighter jets, while RAF Feltwell is mainly concerned with logistics and offers housing for military personnel.
A spokesperson for the British Ministry of Defence, which owns the bases, said: "We take threats seriously and maintain robust measures at defence sites.
"This includes counter drone security capabilities.
"We won't comment further on security procedures."
Follow East of England news on X , Instagram and Facebook: BBC Beds, Herts & Bucks , BBC Cambridgeshire , BBC Essex , BBC Norfolk , BBC Northamptonshire or BBC Suffolk .
More on this story Reprieve for US air base destined to close
The effect of lockdown on Little America
Welcome to England's 'Little America'
Related internet links USAF: RAF Lakenheath
USAF: RAF Mildenhall
Mildenhall Royal Air Force Base
Lakenheath Royal Air Force Base
Mildenhall
Lakenheath
Feltwell
US Armed Forces
Related
Archive will preserve stories of black US airmen
MP calls for transparency over drone factory
'I was one of 85 pilots who flew a US spy plane'
More from the BBC
1 day ago
Eight US sailors assigned to USS Abraham Lincoln attempted suicide, Navy says
In a letter to Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, acting Navy Secretary Hung Cao said the crew had adequate mental health support during the long deployment.
1 day ago
7 days ago
Watch: Sixth batch of UFO files includes orbs from 1952
The footage was filmed by a US Navy officer who reported the group of bright airborne objects to the Air Force's UFO investigation programme.
7 days ago
16 Sept 2026
Photos show widespread damage at US sites from Iranian attacks
A wrecked air force plane and destroyed buildings are among the images obtained by the BBC's partner CBS News.
16 Sept 2026
16 Sept 2026
Ten men deny killing football fan by manslaughter
The defendants will stand trial together at Basildon Crown Court in April.
16 Sept 2026
15 Sept 2026
Watch: What the munitions shortage means for the US
The BBC's Gary O'Donoghue looks at how Operation Epic Fury is impacting ammunitions, and what it could mean for US military readiness.
15 Sept 2026