UK Counter-Unmanned Aircraft Strategy - GOV.UK
Cookies on GOV.UK
We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
Accept additional cookies
Reject additional cookies
View cookies
Hide cookie message
Skip to main content
Policy paper
UK Counter-Unmanned Aircraft Strategy
The UK's new strategy for harnessing the economic and social benefits of unmanned aircraft, by reducing the risk posed by malicious or illegal use.
From:
Home Office
Published:
21 October 2019
Get emails about this page
2019 to 2022 Johnson Conservative government ">
This was published under the 2019 to 2022 Johnson Conservative government
Documents
Counter-Unmanned Aircraft Strategy (HTML)
Ref: CP 187
HTML
Order a copy
Counter-Unmanned Aircraft Strategy
Ref: ISBN 978-1-5286-1554-9, CCS0719668012, CP 187
PDF , 926 KB , 38 pages
Order a copy
This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
Request an accessible format
If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.
Counter-Unmanned Aircraft Strategy (print-ready PDF)
Ref: ISBN 978-1-5286-1554-9, CCS0719668012, CP 187
PDF , 925 KB , 40 pages
Order a copy
This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
Request an accessible format
If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.
Details
The rapid development of drone technology presents significant commercial and leisure opportunities. However, drones can also be used to facilitate and commit crimes, and if flown recklessly or negligently can pose a risk to public safety.
The UK Counter-Unmanned Aircraft Strategy sets out our approach to mitigating the highest-harm risks to the UK resulting from the illegal use of aerial drones.
These include:
facilitating terrorist attacks
facilitating crime, especially in our prisons
disrupting critical national infrastructure (CNI)
Updates to this page
Published 21 October 2019
Sign up for emails or print this page
Get emails about this page
Print this page
Is this page useful?
Maybe
Yes this page is useful
No this page is not useful
Thank you for your feedback
Report a problem with this page
Help us improve GOV.UK
Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
This field is for robots only. Please leave blank
What were you doing?
What went wrong?
Send
Cancel
Help us improve GOV.UK
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab ) .
Cancel