New police powers to tackle illegal use of drones - GOV.UK
Cookies on GOV.UK
We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
Accept additional cookies
Reject additional cookies
View cookies
Hide cookie message
Skip to main content
News story
New police powers to tackle illegal use of drones
New legislation will give police officers the power to land drones, search premises and seize drones and will require users to produce the proper documentation.
From:
Department for Transport and Baroness Sugg CBE
Published:
7 January 2019
2016 to 2019 May Conservative government ">
This was published under the 2016 to 2019 May Conservative government
Drone
police to be given additional powers to land, seize and search drones
government to work on expanded use of technology to detect and repel drones in sites like airports and prisons
exclusion zone extended around airports where drones are banned from flying
from November 2019 drone operators will be required by law to register
The government is moving forward with plans to give police new powers to tackle drones misuse and abuse, with the publication of their response to the drones consultation today (7 January 2019).
Following over 5,000 responses to the consultation , new legislation will give police officers the additional power to land drones and require users to produce the proper documentation. The police will have the power to search premises and seize drones — including electronic data stored within the device — where a serious offence has been committed and a warrant is secured.
Drones video
The Home Office will also begin to test and evaluate the safe use of a range of counter-drone technology in the UK. This crucial technology will detect drones from flying around sensitive sites, including airports and prisons, and develop a range of options to respond to drones, helping to prevent a repeat of incidents such as that recently experienced at Gatwick.
Important safety proposals being taken forward include better protection for our airports by significantly extending the area around airports and runways in which drones are banned from being flown. This builds on the government’s changes to the law last year which made it illegal to fly a drone above 400 feet or within 1 kilometre of an airport.
The Transport Secretary Chris Grayling made a statement in the House of Commons this evening.
Aviation Minister, Liz Sugg said:
Drones have the potential to bring significant benefits and opportunities, but with the speed of technological advancement comes risk, and safety and security must be our top priorities.
That’s why we are giving the police powers to deal with those using drones irresponsibly. Along with additional safety measures these will help ensure the potential of this technology is harnessed in a responsible and safe way.
The police will also be able to issue fixed-penalty notices for minor drone offences to ensure immediate and effective enforcement of vital rules. Fines of up to £100 could be given for offences such as failing to comply with a police officer when instructed to land a drone, or not showing their registration to operate a drone
Aviation, maritime and technology media enquiries
Media enquiries 0300 7777 878
Switchboard 0300 330 3000
Share this page
The following links open in a new tab
Share on Facebook
(opens in new tab)
Share on X
(opens in new tab)
Is this page useful?
Maybe
Yes this page is useful
No this page is not useful
Thank you for your feedback
Report a problem with this page
Help us improve GOV.UK
Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
This field is for robots only. Please leave blank
What were you doing?
What went wrong?
Send
Cancel
Help us improve GOV.UK
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab ) .
Cancel