       The elusive backfire effect: mass attitudes’ steadfast factual
                                 adherence




Thomas Wood                                                                            Ethan Porter
The Ohio State University                                               George Washington University
wood.1080@osu.edu                                                                  evporter@gw.edu

                                           August 5, 2016




                                              abstract

      Can citizens heed factual information, even when such information challenges their
      partisan and ideological attachments? The “backfire effect,” described by Nyhan and
      Reifler (2010), says no: rather than simply ignoring factual information, presenting re-
      spondents with facts can compound their ignorance. In their study, conservatives pre-
      sented with factual information about the absence of Weapons of Mass Destruction in
      Iraq became more convinced that such weapons had been found. The present paper
      presents results from four experiments in which we enrolled more than 8,100 subjects
      and tested 36 issues of potential backfire. Across all experiments, we found only one is-
      sue capable of triggering backfire: whether WMD were found in Iraq in 2003. Even this
      limited case was susceptible to a survey item effect; when presented with a less elab-
      orate survey item, we found no WMD factual backfire. Comparably elaborate items
      were incapable of instilling backfire in questions other than WMD. Evidence of factual
      backfire is far more tenuous than prior research suggests. By and large, citizens heed fac-
      tual information, even when such information challenges their partisan and ideological
      commitments.




We acknowledge the generous guidance of John Brehm, Emily Ekins, Jim Gimpel, Don Green, Will
Howell, David Kirby, Michael Neblo, Brendan Nyhan, and the participants at Center for Strategic
Initiatives workshop. The Cato Institute generously provided financial support for this research.
1       Introduction



C
         an citizens affirm factual information about politics, even when the facts cut against their
          ideological and partisan beliefs? Or are they destined to view the facts through the “percep-
tual screen” (Campbell et. al 1960) that partisanship and ideology impress upon them? The answer

has significant implications for citizen’ competence in a democracy. If indeed individuals are ca-
pable of prioritizing empirical facts over their political allegiances, the prospects for democratic
accountability appear bright. If, on the other hand, they are blinded by their perceptual screens,
it would be unclear how citizens could hold their elected officials accountable, or indeed what role

facts should play in shaping mass attitudes. Nyhan and Reifler (2010) offer strong evidence for

the latter position: subjects presented with facts correcting misperceptions relevant to their ideol-
ogy responded by doubling down on their misperceptions. Particularly among conservatives, at-
tempts to correct misperceptions activated a “backfire effect” against empirical facts, with subjects

more strongly expressing a non-factual belief. Subsequent research has corroborated Nyhan and

Reifler’s initial finding. Republican subjects provided evidence of the scientific consensus on an-

thropogenic climate change became more opposed the need for environmental regulation (Hart and

Nisbet 2011). Providing evidence for the safety of common vaccines to parents already indisposed
to vaccinate their children further reduced their willingness to vaccinate (Nyhan, Reifler and Richey

2014). Confirming that the Affordable Care Act did not introduce “death panels” for terminal pa-

tients entrenched this conviction (Berinsky 2015; Nyhan, Reifler and Ubel 2013). Equally significant

is the backfire effect’s prominence in popular political accounts. Political elites habitually cite this
research to explain the public’s failure to heed facts consistent with the elite’s policy proposal of the

moment.1
         Another line of research, however, draws a different, less worrisome conclusion. Despite the
    1   A Google News search for the “backfire”, “backlash”, or “boomerang” effect and the names of Nyhan or

Reifler returns over 300 unique articles.




                                                      2
power of party and ideology, citizens are indeed capable of learning (Gerber and Green 1999; How-

ell and West 2009; Fishkin and Luskin 2005). Sometimes with encouragements, and sometimes
with small monetary incentives, citizens can absorb and retain complex new political information
(Barnes, Feller, Haselswerdt and Porter 2016; Fishkin 1995; Kuklinski, Quirk, Jerit, Schweider and
Rich 2000); and factual receptivity can take place despite partisan differences ( Bullock, Gerber, Hill
and Huber 2015; Prior 2007; Prior, Sood and Khanna 2015).
      Building on Nyhan and Reifler, the present project maps the boundaries of the backfire effect.
What issues provoke resistance to factual information? Which ideological groups, and members of
which parties, are most likely to evince backfire? And which issues provoke which ideological groups

to backfire? Nyhan and Reifler observed backfire on two high salience issues (whether WMD were
found in Iraq and whether tax cuts ultimately increase tax receipts) and found no backfire on one

less salient, more technical issue (the specific types of stem cell research prohibited by President

Bush.) Testing only three issues makes it to difficult to determine if backfire is caused by ideological
group differences in factual receptivity, or if their results instead reflect the salience and ideological

importance issues being corrected. That is, might liberals also prove factually maladaptive when

presented with correction to the right issue?

      To address these outstanding questions, we staged four separate studies comprised of more
than 30 commonly misunderstood policy areas. Table 1 summarizes the issues corrected. The ma-

jority of issues have been purposefully chosen to tap some of the most important ideological symbols

along the political spectrum. For liberals, this means correcting their incumbent President’s state-
ment about the role of drug sentencing in growing the incarcerated population, and contradicting
their party’s presumptive Presidential nominee’s claim about the incidence of gun violence. For con-
servatives, we contradicted their presumptive nominee’s claim about undocumented immigrants’
criminal records, and provided corrections about the incidence of abortion and teen pregnancy. If
any correction should prompt a respondent to counter-argue unwelcome facts, and inadvertently
entrench their pre-correction attitudes, these politically important, readily understood, recurrently
debated issues stand out as likely candidates. In Carmines and Stimson’s (1980) memorable turn of

                                                    3
phrase, such issues are deemed “easy”, because their recurrence in American politics has rehearsed

individuals on how to respond.
      Across four studies, in which we enrolled more than 8,100 subjects and tested 36 issues of
potential backfire, we observed almost no evidence of a backfire effect. Indeed, we observed only
one significant instance of backfire—and even that instance was ameliorated by simplifying the sur-
vey item. When presented with facts that correct political leaders, subjects along the ideological
spectrum, in possession of diverse partisan attachments, are capable of heeding the correction and
bringing their beliefs in alignment with the facts. This occurs even when the corrections directly
conflict with subjects’ ideological and partisan commitments.

      Ultimately, our results suggest that, contrary to the most skeptical accounts, citizens possess
the prerequisites for democratic competence. When presented with factual information, they can

heed the facts, even when doing so forces them to separate from their ideological attachments. Of

course, ideology and partisanship shaped the extent of our subjects’ factual receptivity. The “per-
ceptual screen” that partisanship instills (Campbell et. al 1960) is real. Yet evidence of differential

learning along partisan lines does not obviate the overall learning we observe (Green and Gerber

1999). The average subject exposed to the correction subsequently expressed attitudes more in line

with the facts. As Lupia and McCubbins (1998) write, “The capabilities of the people and the re-
quirements of democracy are not as mismatched as many critics would have us believe.” Our data

lead us to agree.

      Our experiments used real instances of misstatements by political leaders from both sides of
the aisle. Some subjects were randomly vended a correction, consisting of neutral data from govern-
mental sources. All subjects were then asked whether they agreed with the original misstatement.
Two of the studies presented the misstatements as if they were excerpts from a longer newspaper
article; a third presented subjects with complete fictitious news articles. Among all issues tested,
the only one to generate backfire related to the presence of WMD in Iraq. Yet even this instance of
backfire was susceptible to a survey item effect: when presented with a less elaborate survey item,
no WMD backfire was detected. For all 35 other issues, subjects exposed to the correction did not

                                                  4
             Issue                 .   Speaker                                      Correction

                  Study 1 (Full text of statements, corrections, and items can be found in table 3 on page iii.)
Spiraling Gun Violence                 H.Clinton                   Gun homicides declined by 50% since 1994
Drugs Drive Prison Growth               Obama                 Only 20% of prisoners incarcerated for Drug crimes
Hedge fund mangers pay less
                                       H.Clinton          Average hedge fund manager pays twenty times as much tax
tax than workers
Discrimination sole cause of            Obama          Discrimination accounts for only a fraction of the wage difference
gender wage gap
Obama cuts defense                      Rubio                Obama has increased defense spending relative to Bush
Mexican Immigrants
                                        Trump       Undocumented immigrants offend at lower rate than general population
disproportionately criminal
Rising violence against police           Cruz               Number of police officers killed currently at 130 year low
US taxes highest in world               Trump                  US taxes second lowest among all OECD members

                  Study 2 (Full text of statements, corrections, and items can be found in table 5 on page x.)

Obama Passed TARP                        Palin                        TARP was passed by George W Bush
                                        Obama
Obama accommodates                      Cruz       Obama deported undocumented immigrants at twice the rate of George W
undocumented immigrants                Gutierrez                                Bush
Spiraling teenage pregnancy rate        Carson         Since 1991, black teen pregnancy fallen by 66%, 50% among whites
                                          Lee
                                       Romney
China holds most US debt                Obama                           China holds about 12% of US debt

Whites soon a racial minority          Graham      Whites will be a majority until at least 2045, majority of voters until 2070
                                       Langoria
Spiraling Chicago homicides            LaPierre                         Chicago homicides at 36 year low
                                        Obama
                                         Ryan
Spiraling abortion rate                                                    Abortion rate at 40 year low
                                        Obama
Obama curtails drones’ use             Graham           Obama has ordered ten times as many strikes as his predecessor
                                        Obama

                            Study 3 (Articles and corrections can be found in section A.5 on page xii)

Spiraling Chicago homicides            Obama                            Chicago homicides at 36 year low
                                       LaPierre
Mexican Immigrants
                                        Trump       Undocumented immigrants offend at lower rate than general population
disproportionately criminal
Spiraling Abortion Rate                  Ryan                            Abortion rate at 40 year low
Solar has more jobs than oil           Clinton           Oil industry employs four times more people than solar power.
US Health care twice as                Sanders          Swiss health care only 40% less expensive per capita than the US
expensive as all other states
WMD were found in Iraq                   Bush                             No WMD were found in Iraq.

  Study 4 (Articles and corrections can be found in section A.8 on page xv. Survey items can be found in table 9 on page xx)

WMD were found in Iraq                   Bush                           No WMD were found in Iraq.
Spiraling Abortion Rate                  Ryan                            Abortion rate at 40 year low
Real unemployment rate >30%             Trump                  Unemployment is currently 4.9% (February 2016)
Tax cuts will pay for themselves        Trump              Trump tax plan will increase deficit by almost $10 trillion
EPA: fracking pollutes water           Sanders     EPA finds no systematic relationship between fracking and water pollution
Solar has more jobs than oil           Clinton          Oil industry employs four times more people than solar power.

                      Table 1: Summary of Issues, Speakers, and Corrections across four studies.
reject it—even when the correction conflicted with a speaker who shared their ideology and partisan

affiliation.
       In the first study, we showed subjects eight instances of actual public comments from political
figures, in which the speaker diverged from available empirical evidence. Four of the misstatements
came from Democrats; four came from Republicans. On no issue did we observe backfire. Regard-
less of their party and ideology, the average subject who saw a correction brought her views closer
in line with the facts. For the second study, we identified issues about which politicians from both
ends of the ideological spectrum had made misstatements that could be corrected by reference to
neutral data. For example, political leaders from both parties have made erroneous claims about

the abortion rate and immigration enforcement. Yet once again, regardless of party or ideology, the
average subject exposed to corrective facts was made more in agreement with these facts, even when

doing so required her to reject a co-partisan leader’s misstatements.

       In the third study, subjects read fictitious newspaper articles containing real misstatements
from politicians. For each article, some subjects were randomly assigned to read a version of the

article in which a corrective paragraph was embedded. The paragraph recited data from a neutral

source. Subjects in this study were also exposed to a replication of the original Nyhan and Reifler

news article about WMD in Iraq. When presented with the original survey item that Nyhan and
Reifler used to measure backfire, subjects did indeed backfire, rejecting the facts presented to them.

Yet subjects shown a more succinct survey item did not display backfire. In all other cases in Study 3,

regardless of party or ideology, the average subject exposed to a correction expressed greater agree-
ment with the facts than those to whom no correction had been vended.
       In our final study, we test if comparably complicated survey items can induce backfire in other
policy areas. Subjects again read fictitious newspaper articles with randomized corrections, before
being presented a survey item from one of three levels of complexity. While we again find that WMD
backfire is only apparent with a complicated survey item, comparably complex items failed to induce
backfire in other policy areas. The ability of WMD and a particular survey item to provoke backfire
is unique among all those we tested.

                                                  6
      Our findings do not lead us to conclude that backfire is categorically impossible. Certain is-

sues and certain questions—perhaps asked at moments when ideology or partisanship, or both, are
particularly salient—might plausibly trigger factual backfire. However, despite conducting our ex-
periments during the height of the presidential primary, on issues of keen political interest, we were
unable to locate a single issue of backfire robust to survey item effects. The backfire effect is far less
prevalent than existing research would indicate. It also does not appear to be the exclusive prove-
nance of one ideological group or one party. Instead, we observe members of both parties, and
individuals across the ideological spectrum, reliably adopting corrections. When presented with in-
formation that conflicts with their political leaders, citizens take a Joe Friday approach: They choose

just the facts, ahead of their party or ideology.



2 Why Would Backfire Matter?

Were the backfire effect to be observed across a population, the implications for democracy would

be dire. Facts are meant to matter in a democracy. This is not always the case, of course; politicians

frequently make claims that depart from the truth (Mearsheimer 2012), as do individuals trying to

win political arguments. Yet citizens are expected to be able to use facts to hold their leaders, and

each other, accountable. If a politician promised something but fails to achieve it, the fact of that
promise may be recalled in the voting booth; if an interlocutor claims something has happened that
plainly has not happened, the discrepancy may be pointed out. While consensus on contentious

political issues will rarely be achieved, the public debate around such topics is meant to be reason-

and evidence-based (Rawls 1997). Conceptions of democracy that focus on citizen deliberation
emphasize the necessity of sincere, fact-based debate (Cohen and Sabel 2002). Over 200 years ago,
Condorcet imagined that collective democratic judgments would benefit from a “miracle of aggre-
gation,” where misunderstanding due to informational lassitude or ideological bias would offset, and
average opinions would reflect an informed weighted consensus (Converse 1990).
      In the memorable words of Delli Carpini and Keeter (1996), factual information constitutes


                                                    7
the “currency of citizenship.” The backfire effect would render this currency close to worthless. A

citizen who rejects facts, instead opting to strongly adopt her preferred leader’s mistruths, would
have difficulty holding her leaders accountable (Hochschild and Einstein 2015). She would be unable
to differentiate propaganda (political information that hinges on falsehoods Stanley 2016), from
evidence-based information desirable for democratic deliberation (Gutmann and Thompson 2004).
For the individual who reject the facts, a speaker’s ideological polarity is all that matters–not the
probity of their claims.
      The backfire effect is one part of a broader literature that gives us reason to doubt citizens’
democratic competence. There is voluminous evidence that the average citizen is misinformed about

politics–lacking knowledge about candidates, their policies, and especially the factual circumstances
that shape policy response (Campbell et al 1960; Converse 1964). Low levels of political knowledge

have persisted for decades (Delli Carpini and Keeter 1996). Without a modicum of political knowl-

edge, voters make egregious mistakes, such as holding politicians accountable for shark attacks (Bar-
tels and Achen 2012) and local sports scores (Healy, Malhotra, and Mo 2010), or using recent local

weather to evaluate the plausibility of anthropogenic climate change (Egan and Mullen 2012).

      A divergent perspective posits that, despite low default levels of political knowledge, citizens

make do by relying on a toolkit of cognitive shortcuts. These heuristics cut through the clutter
and prove startlingly efficient as decision aids (Lau and Redlawsk 2001; Lupia 1994; Popkin 1995).

Though the modal amount of political knowledge may be “astonishingly low” (Converse 1964), cit-

izens are capable of changing their beliefs in response to new, contrary information (Gilens 2001;
Howell and West 2009; Kuklinski et al 2000). Citizens can learn new political information even when
it’s complex (Fishkin 1996; Barnes, Feller, Haselswerdt and Porter 2016), and can demonstrate fealty
to the facts despite partisan attachments (; Bullock, Gerber, Hill and Huber 2015; Prior 2007; Prior,
Sood and Khanna 2015). Research which portrays citizens as deficient in political knowledge or
unable to evaluate political information without bias may suffer suffer from measurement error or
exaggeration (Achen 1975; Druckman, Fein, and Leeper 2011; Gibson and Caldiera 2009).
      Given limitations on citizens’ time and cognitive capacities, parties and political leaders beckon

                                                   8
as promising decision aids. A voter does not have to know everything about an issue to evaluate it;

she can rely on what trusted leaders have to say about the issue in question (Zaller 1992). Reliance
on partisan cues, however, breeds its own perversions. Partisans have fundamentally divergent un-
derstandings of the factual landscape (Bartels 2002; Jerit and Barabas 2012). Partisan stereotypes
shape candidate evaluation (Rahn 1993), assessments of how politicians have performed in office,
and agreement with objective facts about macroeconomic behavior (Bartels 2002). Partisans may
be intrinsically motivated to support or agree with their co-partisans, at a cost to factual accuracy
(Taber and Lodge 2006). By the comprehensive accounting of Lenz (2012), citizens utilize facts when
considering performative aspects of a politician’s time in office—how well the economy fared under

a president’s stewardship, for example—but disregard them when thinking through policy matters.
In their description of the influence that party wields over political behavior, Campbell et al (1960)

find that partisanship brings with it “a persistent adherence and a resistance to contrary influence.”

      The backfire effect exemplifies such resistance. Citizens who demonstrate it are only follow-
ing the implications of their supposed dependence on ideological cues. In Nyhan and Reifler’s initial

landmark work on the subject (2010), college-age respondents were presented with fictitious news

articles, designed to look and read like real news articles. In some of the articles, Nyhan and Rei-

fler embedded a correction, consisting of factual evidence contradicting a political leader. Most
famously, they showed all subjects an article about President Bush’s search for WMD in Iraq, while

showing subjects in the treatment condition a factual correction emphasizing that, in fact, no WMD

were found. Conservatives exposed to the correction became more likely, on average, to think that
WMD were found. Conversely, the average liberal exposed to facts about President Bush’s stem cell
prohibitions—he prohibited some, but not all, research—heeded the correction.
      Our experiments were designed to provide subjects with a hard test of their receptivity to
factual information, and an easy test for the factual backfire hypothesis. We clearly marked each
leader’s partisan affiliation, to underscore the fact that agreeing with the correction would mean
disagreeing with the party. To increase the chance of factual backfire, we corrected issues which
are subject to frequent and pitched political debate, so that rehearsed partisan arguments might

                                                  9
be readily accessible to our respondents. We conducted the studies at the height of both parties’

presidential primaries, and in many cases, corrected leading primary candidates on issues central
to their candidacy. To reject the leader and accept the correction would be tantamount to rejecting
one’s partisan “team” (Green, Palmquist and Shickler 2002). Crucially, unlike previous studies that
have found the effects of partisanship on factual receptivity can be lessened, we did not offer subjects
monetary incentives to provide correct answers (Prior 2007; Prior, Sood and Khanna 2015; Bullock,
Gerber, Hill and Huber 2015). We did not even ask or encourage them to provide correct answers,
as has been done elsewhere (Bolsen, Druckman and Cook; 2014Prior and Lupia, 2008). We simply
presented subjects in the correction condition with a political leader’s misstatement and a neutral

correction. In sum, we provided the ideal experimental context to observe factual backfire.



3 The nature of our factual corrections and issues

Journalistic fact checkers strictly appraise the express meaning of officials’ public statements. We

follow Nyhan and Reifler by eschewing this standard. Inspecting our statements demonstrates that,

in most cases, politicians allude to some inaccurate circumstance, without expressly lying. Since

we exclusively use genuine pieces of political rhetoric, elites’ rhetorical strategies limit the extent to

which we can directly contradict the public speaker. For instance, President Bush referred to the
risk that Saddam Hussein would pass WMD to terrorists, Congressman Ryan said that President
Obama sought to make abortions more common, President Obama indicated that drone strikes de-

grade America’s standing abroad and accordingly should be subjected to strenuous restrictions.2 In

these cases, the respective misapprehensions these speakers sought to instill–respectively: that Hus-
sein possessed WMD, that abortions have become more frequent, and drone strikes less so–was not
   2   There are some cases among our misstatements where the speaker’s statement is directly corrected–for

instance, Trump’s statement about the criminal propensities of undocumented immigrants, or Clinton’s claim

about the relative number of Americans employed in the solar sector.




                                                    10
directly expressed, but was rather the obvious conclusion that a reasonable respondent might reach.

It’s these impressionistic inferences of survey respondents, rather than the literal interpretation of
each statement, which guide our choice of corrections.
      In setting this standard, we are guided by our desire to measure the determinants of mass
attitudes, rather than scrutinize office holders’ public statements. If it was the case that survey re-
spondents closely scrutinize the precise limits of a speech, and refuse to make any inference not
directly expressed in a statement, this will be apparent in our experiments. Specifically, we would
observe consistent rejection of these misapprehensions across the ideological spectrum, even absent
a correction. If, however, respondents are only fleetingly engaged with the experiments, minimiz-

ing the effort they spend parsing treatments (Krosnick 1991, Krosnick, Narayan, Smith 1996), and
use their metaphorical capacity to quickly elaborate a statement’s implications (Tversky and Kah-

neman 1983), even when the statements are figurative–these suggestive statements should prompt

misapprehensions outside their strict interpretation.
      In our experiments, we correct misstatements that refer to unambiguous political and social

truths, rather than taking a side in a political debate. Americans can strenuously debate the wisdom

of the Iraq War, what limits to place on abortion, the ideal size of the US prison population–these de-

bates reflect differences in political identities and moral priorities, rather than different sets of facts.
Accordingly, we do not ask respondents to change their policy preferences in response to facts–they

are instead asked to adopt an authoritative source’s description of the facts, in the face of contradic-

tory political rhetoric.



4 Study 1

In the first study, subjects were presented with eight genuine public comments from politicians. In
each instance, the politician’s comments were at odds with available empirical facts. We selected
misstatements about issues important to both ends of the ideological spectrum, and we evenly di-
vided our speakers between the major parties. For each issue, a subject was randomly exposed, or


                                                    11
not exposed, to a correction that cited neutral government data to rebut the speaker. For each issue,

all subjects were asked whether or not they agreed with the position that the speaker had articulated,
for which the empirical data served as the correction.
      For example, we presented all subjects with remarks made by Secretary Hillary Clinton on the
subject of gun violence. In October 2015, Secretary Clinton said:

      “Between 88 and 92 people a day are killed by guns in America. It’s the leading cause
      of death for young black men, the second leading cause for young Hispanic men, the
      fourth leading cause for young white men. This epidemic of gun violence knows no
      boundaries, knows no limits, of any kind.”

Those randomly vended a correction were then told:

      “In fact, according to the FBI, the number of gun homicides has fallen since the mid
      1990s, declining by about 50% between 1994 and 2013.”

All subjects were then asked to agree or disagree, on a five-point scale, with the following claim:

      “The number of gun homicides is currently at an all time high.”

We repeated this structure with comments from President Obama on the causes of incarceration;

Secretary Clinton on the progressivity, or lack thereof, of the US tax rate; President Obama on the

causes of the gender wage gap; Senator Rubio on the trajectory of U.S. defense spending; Donald

Trump on immigration from Mexico; Senator Cruz on violence against police officers; and Donald
Trump on the U.S. tax rate in comparative perspective. With a dateline at the top, the statements were

designed to look like excerpts from news articles. All corrections provided came from governmental
organizations and were cited as such. The order of issues was randomized for each subject. All
speakers’ partisan affiliations were prominently displayed. (Consult table 3 on page iii for the full

text of the speakers’ remarks, the corrections appended, and the wording of the agreement item.)
      More formally, each experiment is an adapted latin squares design (Cochran & Cox, 1960):

                                           T1    T2   · · · TJ
                                                             ..
                                           T2    T3           .
                                            ..        ...
                                             .
                                           TJ · · ·         T1
                                                   12
where j indexes the total number of treatments in some study, the rows indicate the order in which a

respondent saw each treatment, and the columns indicate the possible permutations of treatments.
       An additional complication comes in the form that every treatment was either corrected or
uncorrected. That is, each respondent was exposed to some c count of corrections, where c is an ele-
ment of the set {0, 1, 2... j}. Section 8.2 on page 29 describes the tests to ensure that these elements of
correction exposure did not introduce confounding related to respondents’ characteristics. Section
8.3 on page 31 describes results which show that this design did not introduce demand characteris-
tics or otherwise affect responses. A final complication came in study 4, where each respondent was
exposed to one of three levels of survey item complexity. These items are provided in table 9 in the

appendix on page xx.


4.1 Study 1 Results

Subjects (n=3,127) were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform. For all three studies, we

estimated linear models of the following form




           Agreementi = b0 + b1 (ideology) + b2 (correction) + b3 (ideology × correction) +                 (1)

                           b4 (ideology2 ) + b5 (ideology2 × correction)+

                           b6 (ideology3 ) + b7 (ideology3 × correction)


where i indexes issues. Agreement was measured on a five point likert scale, with larger values
indicating stronger agreement. Ideology is measured on a 7 point likert scale, with larger values
indicating increased conservatism. Corrections are measured with a dummy variable.3 Polynomial
   3   The choice of the OLS model, and the specific measures for agreement, ideology, and correction, were

chosen to reflect Nyhan and Reifler’s (2010) original specifications. This aids the comparison of our respective

results.




                                                      13
terms for ideology and its interaction with the correction were included to capture these variables’

non-linear interactions.
      Figure 1 presents the predicted values and their 95% confidence intervals from each regression
model, with ideology mapped to the x-axis and separate curves for uncorrected (light gray) and cor-
rected (dark gray) ribbons. For each issue, the average corrected subject increased their agreement
with the facts. No ideological group exposed to the correction moved in the opposite direction;
that is, no group demonstrated what Nyhan and Reifler called backfire. Section A.11 shows that
estimating correction effects along the partisan spectrum also shows no evidence of backfire.
      The arrangement of issues within figure 1 is also informative. The facets are sorted by mean

slope between agreement and ideology–with the strongest ideological effects in the top left and bot-
tom right facets. Correction effects (depicted here as the vertical difference between ribbons) are as

large as the total effect of ideology for certain issues. Consider, for instance, the ideological effects

among those evaluating the level of gun violence (in response to Secretary Clinton) or President
Obama’s level of defense spending (in response to Senator Rubio). For both issues, the correction

moves respondents about 1 point along the 5 point scale, which is the same total ideological effect.

These are the issues with the weakest ideological effects, and the largest correction effects. Those

issues with the strongest ideological differences (Donald Trump’s statement on immigrants, and
President Obama’s claim on the causes of the gender wage gap) feature a mean correction effect

which is less than a fifth the size of total ideological effect. This study evidently succeeded in testing

issues of varied ideological salience. Despite what the backfire hypothesis would predict, neither
issues of high nor low salience issues triggered factual backfire.




5 Study 2

For this study, we identified issues about which speakers from both sides of the aisle had departed
from the available evidence. While the comments themselves were naturally distinct, they could


                                                   14
                                                                                                  15




                 t   ed
           o rrec
          c
     Un
                 t    ed
           o rrec
          C




Figure 1: Study 1 correction effects. Curves are the conditional predictions and their 95% confidence
intervals drawn from the regression models described in table 4, on page iv. Issues are sorted by the
overall relationship between ideology and agreement.
both be corrected with reference to the same data. For each issue, subjects were randomly assigned

to see a misstatement by either a Conservative or a Liberal. For example, in December 2015, Senator
Ted Cruz said the following on the subject of immigration:

      “[As President], I will enforce the law. That means you stop the Obama administration’s
      policy of releasing criminal illegal aliens. Do you know how many aliens Bill Clinton
      deported? 12 million. Do you know how many illegal aliens, George W. Bush deported?
      10 million.”

In July 2015, Representative Luis Gutierrez said the following:

      “[President Obama] said he will flex his executive muscle, to be as big and as bold as
      he can be, to reduce deportations of undocumented immigrants... to keep families to-
      gether. I saw our champion.”

In the first instance, a Republican paints the president as weak on immigration enforcement; in the
second, a Democrat paints the president as political ally of the immigrant community. Once again,

on an issue-by-issue basis, some subjects randomly saw, or did not see, a correction. In this case, the

correction read:

      “In fact, according to the Department of Homeland Security, President Obama has de-
      ported illegal immigrants at twice the rate of his predecessor, President George W Bush.”

Then, all subjects were asked to agree or disagree with the following, again on a five-point scale:
“President Obama has been more tolerant of illegal immigration than previous presidents.”

      We repeated this structure with teen pregnancy rates, for which we featured misstatements
by Representative Barbara Lee (a California Democrat), and Dr. Ben Carson (a GOP Presidential

candidate); the bank bailouts, with misstatements by President Obama and Governor Sarah Palin;
China and the U.S. debt, with statements by President Obama and Governor Romney (a GOP Presi-
dential nominee); coming demographic changes to the United States, with misstatements by Senator
Lindsey Graham and Eva Longoria (chairwoman of the 2012 Obama Campaign); gun violence in
Chicago, with misstatements by President Obama and NRA Executive Director Wayne LaPierre;
abortion, with misstatements by President Obama and Speaker Ryan; and drone warfare, with mis-
statements by President Obama and Senator Graham. Once again, all speakers’ partisan affiliations
                                             16
were prominently displayed and the order of issues was randomized for each subject. (Consult ta-

ble 5 on page x for the full text of the speakers’ remarks, the corrections appended, and the wording
of the agreement question.)


5.1 Study 2 Results

Subjects (n=2,801) were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform. We estimate the same
group of models described in equation 1 to find that, regardless of subjects’ ideology, and regard-
less of whether the correction corrected a Democratic or Republican-aligned speaker, the average

subject exposed to the correction brought their views closer in line with the facts. Figure 2 presents
the predicted effect of ideology, the correction, for all 8 issues and both speaker ideologies. As with

figure 1, darker ribbons below the lighter ribbons indicate movement toward the facts. And once
again, for no ideological group did we observe the correction leading to greater agreement with the

speaker and thus deviation from the correction. Of course, subjects with different political leanings

responded differently to the correction provided to them–within each correction type and issue,

ribbons’ steep gradients attest to these ideological effects. Unsurprisingly, respondents had residual
reluctance to abandon co-ideologues and were generally eager to correct ideological opponents. Yet

in no case did an ideological group respond to a co-ideologue being corrected by rejecting the cor-

rection. Furthermore, as discussed in section A.11 on page xxi, partisan affiliation also did not lead
subjects to backfire.




6 Study 3

In the third study, our design simply extended that of Nyhan and Reifler (2010), and concealed
factual corrections within fictitious original news articles. The articles were designed to mimic the
design of an actual news article, with a visible dateline and headline. All subjects read eight arti-
cles, with each article containing an actual misstatement by politician. For each news article, some

                                                  17
Figure 2: Study 2 correction effects. Curves are the conditional predictions and their 95% confidence intervals drawn from the regression
models described in table 4, which is on page iv. Separate issues are included in columns, while speaker ideology is mapped to rows. Issues
are sorted by the overall relationship between ideology and agreement.
subjects were randomly assigned to view a version of the article that contained a factual correction

provided by a neutral government source. For example, all subjects read a news article about Speaker
Ryan’s views on abortion, in which this quote by Ryan is displayed:

       “Ryan’s most cutting criticism, met with enthusiastic applause, was made of the Pres-
       iden’s changed policy on abortion : ‘In the Clinton years, the stated goal was to make
       abortion ’safe, legal and rare.’ Obama stands for an absolute, unqualified right to abortion–
       at any time, under any circumstances, and paid for by taxpayers.”

Subjects who saw the corrected version of the article then saw the following:

       “Statistics from the Center for Disease Control tell a different story. The number of
       abortions steadily declined during President Obama’s first term, with fewer abortions
       in 2012 than any year since 1973.”

       All subjects were then asked to agree or disagree with the information provided by the cor-

rection. We repeated this structure with articles about Senator Clinton’s comments on solar power;
Senator Sanders’ on tax progressivity; and Donald Trump on immigration. For the issue of gun

violence in Chicago, we assigned subjects to read articles with misstatements by either President

Obama or NRA Executive Director Wayne LaPierre, with some seeing a correction with data from

city government. All speakers’ partisan affiliations were prominently displayed and the order of is-
sues was randomized for each subject. (Consult section A.5 on page xii for the full text of fictitious

news articles and the wording of the agreement question.) Subjects in this study were also assigned

to read the same news article about WMD in Iraq that Nyhan and Reifler (2010) use; we describe

those results in sections 6.2 and 6.2.1.


6.1 Study 3 Results

Subjects (n=977) were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform. Correction effects were
estimated with the same linear model depicted in equation 1. The predicted values for each model
are depicted in figure 3. For every issue, the average subject who saw a newspaper article that con-
tained a correction expressed less agreement with the factual inaccuracy,4 all along the ideological
   4   WMD’s discovery in Iraq did generate backfire with a particular survey item. This finding is discussed

further in section 6.2 on page 20.
                                                     19
spectrum. On average, respondents were even willing to contradict co-ideologues, though these

correction effects were smaller.5 The effect of the correction observed in Study 3 was indeed smaller
than the effects in the previous studies. This should not be surprising, as the correction itself was less
conspicuous, since it was embedded in a longer body of text. In addition, conservatives were espe-
cially eager to reject liberal speakers, and conservatives were overall less responsive to corrections.
Figure 3 demonstrates that the most conservative respondents were least responsive to corrections to
conservatives (the top three facets) and were most responsive to corrections of liberals (the bottom
three). Yet only the article about WMD in Iraq led subjects to reject the correction altogether—and
when the survey item about WMD was worded differently, the backfire effect disappeared.


6.2 WMD Backfire and Question Wording Effects

All subjects in Study 3 were also presented with the same fictitious article about WMD in Iraq that

Nyhan and Reifler (2010) used in their original study, with some subjects randomly shown the same

correction that Nyhan and Reifler used. Like Nyhan and Reifler, we also tested for source effects,
by randomly varying whether the article the subjects saw appeared to have been published in The

New York Times, a reputedly liberal outlet, or Fox News, a supposedly conservative one. However,

we departed from Nyhan and Reifler in one crucial respect. To test whether backfire can originate

due to question-wording, we randomly varied whether subjects were asked to agree with Nyhan and

Reifler’s original survey item, or a version we authored.
      Nyhan and Reifler’s original survey item read:

      Immediately before the U.S. invasion, Iraq had an active weapons of mass destruction
      program, the ability to produce these weapons, and large stockpiles of WMD, but Sad-
      dam Hussein was able to hide or destroy these weapons right before U.S. forces arrived.

Our alternative version of the item read:

      Following the US invasion of Iraq in 2003, US forces did not find weapons of mass
      destruction.

   5 This relationship persisted if we compare respondents along the partisan scale. This result is described

in section A.11 on page xxi.
                                                    20
                                                                                                  21




                           e   d
                n co rrect
               U

                      re   cted
                   Cor




                                            Respondent Ideology


Figure 3: Study 3 correction effects. Curves are the conditional predictions and their 95% confidence
intervals drawn from the regression models described in table 7 on page xvi.
The simpler item more directly taps respondents’ factual understanding of the post invasion history,

and does not offer parenthetical statements to measure attitudes about possible strategies Saddam
Hussein might have employed to disperse or conceal WMD. The simpler version also more closely
reflects the common interpretation of Nyhan and Reifler’s finding. The average American voter is not
expected to be familiar with the details of Iraq’s prewar history. To adequately assess President Bush,
and his undertaking to go to war to mitigate the threat posed by Iraqi WMD, citizens should be aware
that no such weapons were found.6 Our simpler item directly measures this factual understanding.


6.2.1 WMD Correction Results

The WMD survey item to which subjects were exposed strongly conditioned their level of factual
backfire. Conservatives presented with Nyhan and Reifler’s version rejected the empirical correction,

becoming more convinced that Saddam Hussein had maintained a WMD program which the US did

not find (replicating the original finding.) Yet conservatives presented with our survey item did not

display backfire.

      In figure 4, we plot the marginal effects of the correction, for both survey items. Respondent
ideology appears on the x-axis. Effects above the red line indicate backfire—subjects rejecting the

correction—while effects below the red line indicate uptake of the correction. Nyhan and Reifler’s

statement prompted conservatives to backfire while our version had no effect on them–they neither
heeded nor backfired against the correction.
      To understand why the two items yielded divergent effects, consider what distinguishes them.
Both items relate to one overarching fact: despite the pledges of the Bush Administration, no WMD
were found in Iraq. Our statements simply asks subjects to agree or disagree with this fact. In
contrast, Nyhan and Reifler’s item presents multiple ways to account for the failure to find WMD.
Together, the facts convey a time line about Hussein’s maintenance of his supposed WMD program
   6 Of course, the attitudinal consequence of this fact remains at the respondent’s discretion, but democratic


competition requires that voters’ adopt a basic set of shared facts.




                                                       22
                                                                                              23



   Adoption Back�ire




Figure 4: Ideology and factual backfire to WMD discovery, by survey item wording. Longer survey
item is from Nyhan and Reifler (2010). Both groups were otherwise provided identical articles and
corrections .
prior to the invasion of Iraq. A subject’s understanding of WMD’s absence in Iraq appears to have

limited bearing on this item–-instead, respondents may have interpreted the question as an invita-
tion to appraise the war in general. What appears to be conservative factual backfire may instead be
conservatives becoming more convinced that the Iraq War was justified.
       More broadly, the sheer number of facts in the statement might have overwhelmed respon-
dents, causing them to fall back with their ideological cohort, in which they had greater confidence.
Imagine a conservative subject who understands that no WMD were found, but has no beliefs about
the other facts that Nyhan and Reifler’s item conveys. When presented with the WMD correction
(and its implied criticism of her co-ideologue President) she might be pushed to adopt a policy po-

sition she believes is ideologically consistent. Such a subject would not be rejecting a factual correc-
tion, inasmuch as she would be preferring the certainty of co-ideologues over the ambiguity of her

factual beliefs in Nyhan and Reifler’s survey item.




7 Study 4

Might the complexity of survey items account for much of the incidence of factual backfire? That

is: when posed a question which directly tests a their factual understanding, respondents might
privilege available facts. When posed a more convoluted item, respondents might weigh facts against

their ideological priorities. This pattern would both account for previous findings and illuminate the

role of factual interventions in conditioning attitudes.
       To test this possibility, 1,333 respondents were recruited from Mechanical Turk, and shown
6 mock newspaper articles,7 with our usual practice of randomizing article order and corrections.
   7   Three articles were taken from study 3: the original Bush WMD article, the piece by Speaker Paul

Ryan criticizing President Obama’s policy toward abortion, and Secretary Hillary Clinton claim that twice

as many Americans were employed in solar than in the oil industry. Three novel mock articles were also

provided: Senator Sanders claiming that the EPA had found fracking was responsible for polluting water

supplies, Donald Trump claiming that his tax cut plan would grow federal tax receipts, and Trump claiming
                                                   24
Using Nyhan and Reifler’s original WMD item as a model, we wrote comparably complex items

for the other issues, along with moderate and simple versions. Each respondent saw one item per
issue. To test the effect of item complexity, we used four issues by conservatives, and two by liberals,
including a tax claim by Donald Trump that was comparable to the those which generated backfire
in the original Nyhan and Reifer piece.
      Table 9 (found in the appendix, on page xx) describes all 18 items. For instance, to measure
agreement with Donald Trump’s claim that the real unemployment rate was greater than 30%, the
three items were:



Simple:      The true unemployment rate is greater than 30%.

Moderate: After removing the effects of politicians interfering with the data, the true unemploy-
          ment rate is greater than 30%.

Complex: The unemployment rate has important political ramifications, and government statisti-
         cians are susceptible to threats and influence. After removing the effects of politicians
         interfering with the data, the true unemployment rate is greater than 30%.


Using Nyhan and Reifler’s original WMD item as a model, a more complicated survey items offered

preambulatory explanations for the fact which comprised the question’s substance. Moderate items

provide fewer explanations.


7.1 Study 4 Results

Figure 5 shows the marginal effects of each correction, with different issues mapped to the column

facets, and survey item complexity mapped to the row facets. Ribbons above the dashed horizontal
indicate factual backfire. Among the eighteen item× complexity combinations, only one generated
backfire–the factual correction of WMD when measured using a complex survey item. The tax cut
that the true unemployment rate was actually higher than 30%. These mock articles can be read in section

A.8, which can be found in the appendix on page xv. The items can be read in table 9 on page xx.




                                                    25
cost issue, which generated backfire with a simple item for Nyhan and Reifler, was not replicated,

with all three complexity types providing similar factual adherence.
       These items provide what should be an even easier test for backfire, by loading measures of
factual attitudes with preambulatory clauses that should crowd out the correction’s influence. Com-
plicated items also seem prone to induce factual counter-arguing by listing separate ways to account
for some outcome. This study also tested two items from Donald Trump, a candidate whose rejec-
tion of fact checkers and the judgment of the national political establishment is central to his appeal.
Yet when Trump alleges a complicated political conspiracy to hide the true extent of unemployment,
a correction which cites the very federal agency implicated by Trump (the Bureau of Labor Statistics)

is accepted by our subjects. The influence of facts even in these circumstance invites us to imagine
the exceptional circumstances needed to engender factual backfire.



8 Robustness Checks

8.1 Post-Stratification

The demographic composition of the MTurk population does not mirror America. To participate in
an online labor market, an individual must have a reliable internet connection and ample free-time.

Accordingly, MTurk samples tend to be whiter, younger, less affluent, and less religious than the

population at large (Berinsky, Huber, and Lenz, 2012, Huff and Tingley 2015). Despite this, MTurk

respondents have been shown to be largely indistinguishable from co-ideologues in recruited online
panels (Clifford, Jewel, and Waggoner 2015), and that simply controlling for demographic charac-

teristics makes the attitudinal distribution of an MTurk sample appear very similar to a national face
to face survey (Levay, Freese, and Druckman 2016).8
   8   If face to face probability samples comprise the “gold standard” of survey research, it’s increasingly ap-

parent that the undergraduate convenience sample is the worst method for making inferences about mass

political correlates (Heinrich, Heine and Norenzayan, 2010). Across a slew of important measures for po-

litical attitudes–racial resentment, ideological constraint, attentiveness to political news–undergraduates are

                                                       26
Adoption Back�ire
    Figure 5: Study 4’s test the effect of survey item complexity and factual backfire. Ribbons show estimated marginal effects and their 95%
    confidence interval from the linear models in table 8, on page xvii. The rightmost two columns aggregate corrections according to the ideology
    of the speakers. All survey items can be read in table 9, on page xx. Areas entirely above the dashed origin indicate factual backfire.
      Since weighting on observed demographics has been demonstrated to improve the represen-

tativeness of the MTurk attitudinal distributions, we used rake weights to determine if making the
sample more representative would affect correction sizes. If the young MTurk sample is more re-
ceptive of new political information, or if the heightened education of this group made them more
ideologically constrained and hence inclined to resist new political information, making the sample
more representative provides a better indication of how a national probability sample might respond
to factual corrections. Using population estimates from the US Census, Pew Foundation, and the
American National Election studies, weights allowed us to compare mean differences according to
corrections and ideological cohorts, to weighted mean differences conditional on the same covari-

ates.9 For all issues and studies, these mean differences are plotted in figure 6. The pre and post
weighted distributions are in table 10 in the appendix, on page xxiii .

      This figure depicts the correction among the MTurk sample with a hollow point, and the mean

difference among the sample weighed to appear like the US population with a solid point. Across
the 36 corrections, post stratification generally makes a negligible difference to a correction effect’s
categorically dissimilar to other Americans. This compounds the difficulty in using these findings to under-

stand political behavior, since so many foundational papers (Nyhan and Reifler (2010) among them) used

undergraduate samples or samples of comparably aged subjects.



   9 More formally, the unweighted correction effect for issue i (c ) was estimated as follows:
                                                                   i
                                                ∑m                   ∑m
                                                  j=1 Isc (j)yj       j=1 Isu (j)yj
                                        ci =     ∑m             −    ∑m
                                                   j=1 Isc (j)         j=1 Isu (j)

  where i indexes issues, and j indexes respondents, so that and I indicates which correction*ideology sub-

population a respondent falls into–so Isc is an indicator that the respondent saw a correction, and Iuc indicates

they didn’t see a correction. The weighted correction effect (c∗ ) were computed as follows


                                               ∑m                    ∑m
                                                j=1 Isc (j)yj wj      j=1 Isu (j)yj wj
                                  c∗i    =     ∑m                −   ∑m
                                                 j=1 Isc (j)wj         j=1 Isu (j)wj

  where notation is as above, except wj is the post stratification weight for the jth respondent.


                                                          28
magnitude. Large differences in correction effects are attributable to certain issues–for instance,

corrected attitudes on teen pregnancy, gun violence, and China’s ownership of US debt were more
than 1.5 points lower than uncorrected attitudes, while other issues had correction effects a third
as big. Compared to this variance, weighting differences are generally smaller than two tenths of
a point. Similarly, neither unweighted nor weighted corrections are smaller or larger overall. This
suggests that the MTurk estimates of the correction effects are close to what would be observed in a
national sample.


8.2 Did Exposure to Corrections Affect Ideological and Partisan Self-Identification?

Our survey design for all three studies presented subjects with either a corrected or uncorrected

version of an issue, with the issue of orders randomized. Some tiny number of respondents saw
only uncorrected or corrected issues; others saw extended sequences of a single issue type. To check

against an inadvertent relationship between the sequence and count of corrections a respondent saw,

and survey respondents’ other characteristics, we performed two separate tests for categorical and

continuous covariates. These results are reported in table 2.
      The rows in table 2 are organized in two groups–the first four rows report associations be-

tween survey design and respondents’ categorical covariates (measured with Cramer’s V effect size

estimate), while the next four report association with continuous covariates (measured with a Pear-

son correlation coefficient). The columns are organized in three groups, according to three different

measures of a respondent’s pattern of correction exposure. The first column group indicates the
count of total corrections to which a respondent was exposed, the second, the longest unbroken se-

quence of corrections a respondent saw, and the third, the count of sequences of corrections two or
longer. Each statistic is reported separately by study wave.
      The tiny effects in table 2 demonstrate two things. First, the randomization of corrections and
issue order succeeded. Second, there was no apparent effect running from the pattern of correc-
tion exposure to respondents’ characteristics–that is, the number of corrections a respondent saw
did not move them along the ideological or partisan spectrum, or cause them to report different

                                                  29
                                                                                                                           30




                                                   ●
                                                   ●                        ●●                            ●
                                                                                                          ●
                                                   ●
                                                   ●                         ●●                              ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                           ●                             ● ●                            ●●
                                            ●●                            ● ●                           ●●
                                                   ● ●                   ●●                            ● ●
                                               ●                          ●●                                  ●●
                                                   ●●                      ●                                 ●●
                                                        ●●                           ●●                         ● ●
                                                          ●
                                                          ●                          ●●                          ●●
                                                          ●
                                                          ●                           ●
                                                                                      ●                          ● ●

                                           ●
                                           ●                            ●●                            ●
                                                                                                      ●
                                   ●     ●                        ●●                                ●●
                                       ● ●                       ● ●                               ● ●
                                        ●
                                        ●                          ●●                             ● ●
                                       ●
                                       ●                            ● ●                              ● ●
                                         ●●                        ●                                ● ●
                                           ●
                                           ●                          ● ●                          ●     ●
                                           ●●                       ●●                                 ●●
                                          ●                            ●   ●                         ●●
                                             ●●                     ●●                                    ●●
                                          ●●                          ● ●                                  ●●
                                         ●●                           ●●                                        ●
                                                                                                                ●
                                              ●●                       ●●                               ●
                                             ●●                         ● ●                           ●●
                                               ●●                     ●●                               ● ●
                                               ●●                         ●●                                 ●
                                                ●                         ● ●                                ●●

                                                   ●                             ●                                  ● ●
                                           ●●                           ●    ●                               ● ●
                                            ● ●                         ●               ●                     ●●
                                                        ●●              ●       ●                               ● ●
                                               ●●                              ●          ●                   ●      ●
                                                 ● ●                         ●●                                   ●  ●
                                                    ●        ●                ●               ●                    ● ●

                                                         ●●                      ●●                                 ●●
                                                   ●    ●           ●    ●                                      ● ●
                                                        ●●                   ●          ●                       ●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                   ●
                                                   ●                                 ●●                           ●    ●
                                                         ●●                          ●●                             ● ●
                                                          ●●                            ● ●                       ● ●
                                                          ●                            ● ●                          ●●




                                           ●                                     ●




Figure 6: Effect of post stratification on correction effects. Issues are listed in the y axis, with the
respective speaker in parentheses. Hollow points indicate the size of the correction among the MTurk
sample. Solid points indicate the size of the correction after weighting for US population margins in
race, income, education, religion, ideology, partisanship, age, and gender. Larger points average over
separate items. The pre and post weighted distributions of these variables is provided in table xxiii on
page 10.
                                   Total Corrections           Maximum sequence of                Corrections sequences
                            .............(count)                corrections length                two or longer (count)
                 Study:          1         2      3      4       1      2        3          4       1        2       3        4
Categorical




              Education  .065         .049     .092    .034    .057       .05   .069      .012     .017    .029     .062    .074
              Employment .047         .045     .068     .061   .048     .049    .067     .076     .027     .038     .064    .023
              Gender     .059         .042      .073   .093    .062     .028    .065     .076       .05    .034     .054     .019
              Race         .05        .053      .081   .049    .043     .036    .069      .031     .031    .029     .038    .059

              Age            .025        0     -.015    .012   -.003     .023     .019    -.012   -.024       .02   .003    -.034
Continuous




              Ideology        .014   -.027    -.045    .032    -.022    .006     .022    -.067     -.012   -.005    .032    -.077
              Income         -.011    .014     .026    .087     .006    .008     .028     .026    -.034    -.023    .039    -.023
              Patisanship   -.018     .027      .017    .019    .006    -.016   -.032     .088     .002     .005     -.03     .012


              Table 2: Tests of covariate balance. Columns report different measures of correction exposure–in
              order: the count of total corrections a respondent saw, the longest unbroken sequence of corrections,
              and the count of correction sequences two or longer, for all three studies. The first four rows report
              tests with categorical covariates: these cells reports the Cramer’s V effect size estimate. The second
              four rows report tests with continuous covariates: thse cells reports the Pearson correlation coefficient.


              characteristics.


              8.3 Did the experimental design reduce the efficiency of our model estimates?

              In each of our studies, respondents saw a sequence of issues, uncorrected or corrected on a ran-

              dom basis, and in a random order. While the results in table 2 demonstrated that experimental
              design was not related to respondents’ characteristics, it remains possible that design factors in-
              advertently conditioned factual agreement to the tested issues. This would be a classic case of a
              “demand characteristic”–where subjects’ awareness of an experiment’s purpose affects their other-
              wise ingenuous responses. Respondents who had been exposed to a long sequence of corrections
              might become conditioned to be more accepting of factual correction. Conversely, a respondent
              might resent the provision of corrections and the resultant ideological confusion–as the number of
              successive corrections accrue, such a respondent might rest increasingly on their ideological priors
              in answering attitudes. Because we randomize the order of issues to which subjects are exposed,

                                                                   31
neither potential effect (whether it increased or decreased the average correction effect) would bias

our overall results, but they would introduce hetereogeneity which would decrease our estimates’
precision.
      To test this possibility, we estimated two classes of linear models, wherein agreement to each
issue was made a function of two survey quantities–the order in which a respondent was exposed to
a particular issue, and the cumulative sum of corrections a respondent observed prior to a question,
with interactions between ideology and correction status. More formally, the models were:




  Agreementi = b0 + b1 (Survey Quantityj )+                                                          (2)

                     b2 (Ideology) + b3 (Correction)+

                     b4 (Ideology × Survey Quantityj ) + b5 (Correction × Survey Quantityj )+

                     b6 (Correction × Ideology) + b7 (Correction × Ideology × Survey Quantityj )


Where i indexes issues, and j indexes survey quantities: the order in which an item was exposed

(measured by the rank) and the number of corrections exposed prior to an item (measured with

a count). To simplify this analysis, in figure 7, we provide a parallel coordinates plot with all the

coefficients that pertain to the survey quantities–so, terms b1 , b4 , b5 , and b7 , from the equation
above.
      Figure 7 shows that neither the order in which an issue was vended, nor the count of prior cor-

rections a respondent saw, affected issue agreement, either directly or via an interaction. If subjects
had experienced significant demand characteristics, figure 7 would show that experimental charac-
teristics were having a significant effect on these coefficients, across many issues. Instead, 222 of the
240 coefficients tested were insignificant. Second, those few variables which did feature some small
number of significant coefficients (for instance, the b4 term in the bottom facet) tended to have di-
ametric effects–sometimes previous corrections increased correction effects, other times it shrunk
them. Finally, the only issue that feature four significant terms (President Obama implying that

                                                   32
                                                                                                                            33




            Region of statistical signi�icance
                                                                                                           ●
            ●                                                                                              ●




                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●                           ●
            ●
            ●




            ●                                      China holds most
                                                 ● US debt (Obama)             ●
            ●




            ●
            ●
                                                                               ●                           ●
            ●
                                                                               ●

             b1:                                b7:                             b4:                         b6:
       Survey Quant j         Correction × Ideology × Survey Quantj Correction × Survey Quantj   Ideology × Survey Quantj



                                                                                    ●




Figure 7: Parallel coordinates plot showing relationship between survey design and factual agree-
ment. Each line is a separate linear model, estimating agreement as a function of the term indicated
on the x-axis. Hollow points indicate insignificant coefficients, solid points indicate significant coef-
ficients. The top top facet reports effect of question order, bottom facet reports effects of previous
corrections observed. Shaded areas are regions of coefficient significance. These results demonstrate
that experimental design factors did not systematically influence respondents.
China holds the bulk of US debt) was paired, and its conservative speaking counterpart issue saw no

such significant effects.



9 Discussion

If citizens were to systematically reject empirical facts that conflicted with their ideological and parti-
san sympathies, the possibility of democratic accountability would be imperiled. We find, however,
that backfire appears to be largely a function of question wording, not a characteristic of the general
public’s relationship to factual information. Across four experiments in which we enrolled more
than 8,100 subjects and tested 36 issues of potential backfire, we observed backfire only in response

to a correction about WMD in Iraq; an issue on which Nyhan and Reifler (2010) originally observed

backfire. Even this instance of backfire disappeared when we simplified the wording of the survey

item. Across all the potential backfire we studied, figure 8 depicts the mean correction size, aver-
aging across separate issues, by respondent ideology and speaker ideology. Overwhelmingly, when

presented with factual information that corrects politicians–even when the politician in question

is an ally–subjects responded by agreeing with the correction and distancing themselves from the

corrected politician.

      Our findings are consistent with one of the most well-documented aspects of mass public
opinion: respondents shy away from cognitive effort, and will deploy shrewd strategies to avoid it

(Lippmann, 1922). In contrast, the backfire hypothesis proposes that a subject, when furnished facts
inconsistent with her ideological commitments, will resolve the challenge of these facts by concoct-

ing new considerations to offset the threatening information. As Nyhan and Reifler (2010) describe
it, backfire may be the “possible result of the process by which people counter-argue preference-
incongruent information and bolster their preexisting views.” Developing counter-arguments would
be unusually effortful, as sophisticated respondents can simply filter out, rather than counterargue,
unwelcome facts (Zaller, 1992). If indeed subjects who backfire are counter-arguing, it is worth re-
calling that many of the samples that have identified backfire were gathered in university settings.


                                                    34
                                                                                                  35




                                                                               Speaker Ideology
                                      ●     ● ●                                C:Conservatives
                                                                               A: All Speakers
                                                ●                              L: Liberal
                                              ●●
                                                 ●         ●
                                           ●


                                 ● ●
                               ●
                                 ●
                                 ●
                                 ●
                                    ●
                                ●●

                                                                ●
                                                               ●●
                                                      ●●
                                                       ●
                                                     ●●
                                                       ●

                                                         ● ●
                                                       ●
                                                      ●  ●
                                                  ●
                                                    ●    ●
                                      ●

                                          ●●
                                            ●
                                            ●●
                                            ●
                                        ● ●                         Adoption     Back�ire
                                      ●




Figure 8: Overall correction effects and 95% confidence interval, by study, respondent ideology, and
speaker ideology. Mean effect indicated by label position. Label text corresponds to speaker types–
whether it includes only Conservative speakers (C), all speakers (A), or Liberal speakers (L).
Social psychologists have long known that students and faculty take unusual pleasure in cognitive

effort (Petty, Cacciopo, Morris 1983). For this reason, undergraduates or college-aged respondents
may simply be more prone to displaying backfire than the broader population.
       Other findings that paint citizens as alarmingly ill-equipped for democracy have suffered from
similar sample selection issues. For example, by one accounting, voters factors in local sports scores
when deciding to reelect an incumbent (Healy, Malhotra and Mo 2010). More recent research, how-
ever, has challenged this finding, suggesting that the purported connection may actually be a false
positive (Fowler and Montagnes 2016). Research that claims to show widespread democratic in-
competence may mistake the snapshot that any one study represents for the sum total of citizens’

abilities.
       Our findings are not without their own limits. That voters do not reject the facts presented to

them does not mean that they have retained the information that the corrections convey. The facts

we have provided subjects may quickly become inaccessible to them. Yet they do not reflexively
reject that information–and plainly, they do not go to the effort of compounding inaccurate beliefs,

as the backfire hypothesis would predict. At least for a brief moment, their perceptual screens dim,

and the facts prevail.




                                                  36
10 References

        Achen, Christopher. “Mass Political Attitudes and the Survey Response.” American Political
Science Review, 1975. http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0003055400245012.
        Achen, Christopher H, and Larry M Bartels. Blind Retrospection : Why Shark Attacks Are Bad
For Democracy. Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, 2012.
        Barnes, L, A Feller, J Haselswerdt, and E Porter. Information and Preferences over Redistributive
Policy: A Field Experiment, n.d.
        Bartels, Larry M. “Beyond the Running Tally: Partisan Bias in Political Perceptions.” Political

Behavior 24, 2 (2002): 117–50.
        Berinsky, Adam J. “Rumors and Health Care Reform: Experiments in Political Misinforma-

tion.” British Journal of Political Science, June (2015): 1–22. doi:10.1017/S0007123415000186.
        Berinsky, Adam J., Gregory A. Huber, and Gabriel S. Lenz. “Evaluating Online Labor Markets

for Experimental Research: Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk.” Political Analysis 20, 3 (2012): 351–

68. doi:10.1093/pan/mpr057.

        Bullock, John G., Alan S. Gerber, Seth J. Hill, and Gregory A. Huber. “Partisan Bias in Factual
Beliefs about Politics.” Working Paper, March (2013): 1–73. doi:10.1561/100.00014074.

        Cacioppo, John T., Richard E. Petty, and Katherine J. Morris. “Effects of Need for Cognition

on Message Evaluation, Recall, and Persuasion.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1983.

doi:10.1037/0022-3514.45.4.805.
        Campbell, Angus, Philip E. Converse, Miller, Warren E., and Donald E. Stokes. The American
Voter. John Wiley and sons, 1960.
        Carpini, M, and S Keeter. What Americans Know about Politics and Why It Matters. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1997.
        Clifford, S., R. M. Jewell, and P. D. Waggoner. “Are Samples Drawn from Mechanical Turk Valid
for Research on Political Ideology?” Research & Politics 2, 4 (2015). doi:10.1177/2053168015622072.
        Cochran, William G., and Gertrude M Cox. Experimental Designs. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
1957.
                                                    37
        Converse, Philip E. “The Nature of Belief Systems in Mass Publics (1964).” Critical Review: A

Journal of Politics and Society, 18, 1–3 (2006): 1–74. doi:10.1080/08913810608443650.
        Druckman, James N., Jordan Fein, and Thomas J. Leeper. “A Source of Bias in Public Opinion
Stability.” American Political Science Review 106, no. 02 (2012): 430–54. doi:10.1017/S0003055412000123.
        Egan, Patrick J., and Megan Mullin. “Turning Personal Experience into Political Attitudes: The
Effect of Local Weather on Americans’ Perceptions about Global Warming.” The Journal of Politics,
74, 3 (July 11, 2012): 796–809. doi:10.1017/S0022381612000448.
        Fishkin, James S. The Voice of the People: Public Opinion and Democracy. Yale University Press,
1997.

        Fishkin, James S, and Robert C Luskin. “Experimenting with a Democratic Ideal: Deliberative
Polling and Public Opinion.” Acta Politica, 2005. doi:10.1057/palgrave.ap.5500121.

        Galston, WA. The Practice of Liberal Pluralism, 2005.

        Gerber, Alan, and Donald Green. “Misperceptions About Perceptual Bias.” Annual Review of
Political Science 2 (1999): 189–210. doi:10.1146/annurev.polisci.2.1.189.

        Gibson, James L, and Gregory A Caldeira. Citizens, Courts, and Confirmations: Posivity Theory

and the Judgements of the American People. 2009.

        Gilens, Martin. “Policy Ignorance.” American Political Science Review 95, 2 (2001): 379–96.
        Green, Donald, Bradley Palmquist, and Eric Schickler. Partisan Hearts and Minds. Yale Uni-

versity Press, 2004.

        Hart, P. S., and E. C. Nisbet. “Boomerang Effects in Science Communication: How Moti-
vated Reasoning and Identity Cues Amplify Opinion Polarization About Climate Mitigation Poli-
cies.” Communication Research 39, no. 6 (2012): 701–23. doi:10.1177/0093650211416646.
        Henrich, Joseph, Steven J Heine, and Ara Norenzayan. “The Weirdest People in the World?”
The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33, 2–3 (2010): 61–135. doi:10.1017/S0140525X0999152X
        Hochschild, Jennifer, and Katherine Levine Einstein. Do Facts Matter?: Information and Mis-
information in American Politics. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2015.
        Howell, William G, and Martin R West. “Educating the Public.” Education Next 9, 3 (2009):

                                                   38
40–47.

        Huckfeldt, Robert, Jeffrey Levine, William Morgan, and John Sprague. “Accessibility and the
Political Utility of Partisan and Ideological Orientations.” American Journal of Political Science, 43,
3 (1999): 888–911. doi:10.2307/2991839.
        Huff, Connor, and Dustin Tingley. “‘Who Are These people?’ Evaluating the Demographic
Characteristics and Political Preferences of MTurk Survey Respondents.” Research & Politics 2, 3
(2015). doi:10.1177/2053168015604648.
        Jerit, Jennifer, and Jason Barabas. “Partisan Perceptual Bias and the Information Environ-
ment.” The Journal of Politics 74, 3 (2012): 672–84. doi:10.1017/S0022381612000187.

        Krosnick, Jon A. “Response Strategies for Coping with the Cognitive Demands of Attitude
Measures in Surveys.” Applied Cognitive Psychology 5, no. 3 (May 1991): 213–36. doi:10.1002/acp.2350050305.

        Krosnick, Jon A, Sowmya Narayan, and Wendy R Smith. “Satisficing in Surveys: Initial Evi-

dence.” New Directions for Evaluation, 70 (1996): 29–44. doi:10.1002/ev.1033.
        Kuklinski, James H., and Paul J. Quirk. “Reconsidering the Rational Public: Cognition, Heuris-

tics, and Mass Opinion.” Elements of Reason: Cognition, Choice and the Bounds of Rationality, 2000,

153–82.

        Lenz, Gabriel S. Follow the Leader?: How Voters Respond to Politicians’ Policies and Perfor-
mance. University of Chicago Press, 2013.

        Levay, K. E., J. Freese, and J. N. Druckman. “The Demographic and Political Composition of

Mechanical Turk Samples.” SAGE Open 6, 1 (2016). doi:10.1177/2158244016636433.
        Lodge, Milton, and Charles S. Taber. The Rationalizing Voter. Cambridge University Press,
2013.
        Lupia, Arthur. “Shortcuts versus Encyclopedias: Information and Voting Behavior in Cal-
ifornia Insurance Reform Elections.” The American Political Science Review, 88, 1 (1994): 63–76.
doi:10.2307/2944882.
        Lupia, Arthur, and Mathew D. McCubbins. The Democratic Dilemma: Can Citizens Learn
What They Need to Know? 1998.

                                                  39
      Nyhan, Brenda., J. Reifler, S. Richey, and G. L. Freed. “Effective Messages in Vaccine Promo-

tion: A Randomized Trial.” Pediatrics 133, 4 (2014): e835–42. doi:10.1542/peds.2013-2365.
      Nyhan, Brendan, and Jason Reifler. “When Corrections Fail: The Persistence of Political Mis-
perceptions.” Political Behavior 32, 2 (2010): 303–30. doi:10.1007/s11109-010-9112-2.
      Nyhan, Brendan, Jason Reifler, Christopher Edelman, William Passo, Ashley Banks, Emma
Boston, Andrew Brown, et al. “Answering on Cue ?,” 2015.
      Nyhan, Brendan, Jason Reifler, and Peter A. Ubel. “The Hazards of Correcting Myths about
Health Care Reform.” Medical Care, 51, 2 (2013): 127–32. doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e318279486b.
      Popkin, Samule. The Reasoning Voter: Communication and Persuasion in Presidential Cam-

paigns. University of Chicago Press, 1994.
      Prior, Markus. “Is Partisan Bias in Perceptions of Objective Conditions Real? The Effect of

an Accuracy Incentive on the Stated Beliefs of Partisans.” In Annual Conference of the Midwestern

Political Science Association, 2007.
      Prior, Markus, Gaurav Sood, and Kabir Khanna. “The Impact of Accuracy Incentives on Par-

tisan Bias in Reports of Economic Perceptions.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 10, no. July

(2015): 489–518. doi:10.1561/100.00014127.

      Rahn, Wendy M. “The Role of Partisan Stereotypes in Information Processing about Political
Candidates.” American Journal of Political Science 37, 2 (1993): 472–96.

      Thorson, Emily. “Belief Echoes: The Persistent Effects of Corrected Misinformation.” Political

Communication, 46, 9, November (2015): 1–21. doi:10.1080/10584609.2015.1102187.
      Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. “Extensional Versus Intuititive Reasoning: The Con-
juction Fallacy in Probability Judgment.” Psychological Review, 90, 4 (1983). http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/rev/90/
      Wood, Thomas, and Eric Oliver. “Toward a More Reliable Implementation of Ideology in Mea-
sures of Public Opinion.” Public Opinion Quarterly 76, no. 4 (2012): 636–62. doi:10.1093/poq/nfs045.
      Zaller, John R. The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion Cambridge University Press, 1992.




                                                 40
A Appendix (Online Only)

A.1 Study 1 Misstatements, Corrections, and Survey Items

    Misstatement                                     Correction                 Survey Item

    “Between 88 and 92 people a day are killed by
    guns in America. It’s the leading cause of       In fact, according to
    death for young black men, the second            the FBI, the number of
    leading cause for young Hispanic men, the        gun homicides has          The number of gun
    fourth leading cause for young white men.        fallen since the mid       homicides is currently
    This epidemic of gun violence knows no           1990s, declining by        at an all time high
    boundaries, knows no limits, of any kind.”       about 50% between
    Secretary Hillary Clinton (D) ”Town Hall         1994 and 2013.
    Meeting”, Manchester NH, October 5, 2015


    ”In 1980, there were 500,000 people behind       In fact, according to
    bars in America. Today there are 2.2 million.    the Federal Bureau of
    Over the last few decades, we’ve also locked     Justice Statistics, only
    up more and more nonviolent drug offenders       20% of prisoners in        Drug convictions are
    than ever before, for longer than ever before.   the US committed a         the main cause of the
    And that is the real reason our prison           nonviolent drug            high prison
    population is so high.”                          offense. Over half of      population.
    President Barack Obama (D) ”Remarks at the       all prisoners were
    NAACP Conference”, Philadelphia, PA, July        convicted of violent
    14, 2015                                         crimes.


    ”We need to get back into the habit of
    actually rewarding workers with increases in     In fact, according to
    their paychecks... Warren Buffett has said it,   the Bureau of Labor
    but so have a lot of other people. There’s       Statistics, the average    Nurses and truck
    something wrong when hedge fund managers         hedge fund manager         drivers pay more in
    make more, and pay less in taxes, than nurses    pays about 20 times as     taxes than hedge fund
    or truck drivers.”                               much income tax as         managers.
    Secretary Hillary Clinton (D) ”Remarks on        the average truck
    Small Business”, Cedar Rapids, IA, May 19,       driver or nurse.
    2015




                                                     i
Misstatement                                     Correction                  Survey Item

                                                 In fact, a report for the
                                                 Department of Labor
“Today, women make up about half our             found that the Wage
workforce. But they still make 77 cents for      Gap claim does not
every dollar a man earns. That is wrong, and     take into account
in 2014, it’s an embarrassment. A woman          differences in              Women are paid less
deserves equal pay for equal work... It’s time   occupation, position,       than men for the same
to do away with workplace policies that          education, job tenure       work, mainly becuase
belong in a “Mad Men” episode.”                  or hours worked per         of discrimination
President Barack Obama (D) ”2014 State of        week. After adjusting
the Union Address”, Washington, DC, January      for these factors,
28, 2014                                         women earn 95 cents
                                                 for every dollar men
                                                 earn.


“Defense spending has fallen dramatically on
President Obama’s watch, and our forces have     In fact, according to
been reduced and suffered readiness              the Defense
                                                                             Defense spending
challenges even as threats abroad increase.      Department, defense
                                                                             under President
Our military therefore needs a serious           spending under
                                                                             Barack Obama is
program of reinvestment and                      President Obama is
                                                                             lower than it was
modernization.”                                  higher than it was
                                                                             under President Bush.
Senator Marco Rubio (R-FL) ”Campaign             under President
Rally: My Plan to Restore American Strength”,    George W. Bush.
Manchester NH, November 5 2015


”When Mexico sends its people, they’re not       In fact, according to
sending their best. They’re sending people       the Congressional
that have lots of problems, and they’re          Research Service,           Undocumented/illegal
bringing those problems to us. They’re           undocumented/illegal        immigrants commit
bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime.          immigrants commit           crimes at a higher rate
They’re rapists.”                                crimes at a lower rate      than most Americans.
Donald Trump (R-NY) ”Campaign Launch”,           than the general
New York, NY, June 16, 2015                      population.




                                                 ii
Misstatement                                        Correction                Survey Item

”The number of law enforcement officers
killed as a result of violence has been on a
precipitous upswing. If the police are              In fact, according to
intimidated, if they are scared, if they are not    public records,
willing to do their jobs, we know the result.       homicides of law
                                                                              The number of police
The result is the loss of life. The result is       enforcement officers
                                                                              officers killed in the
rising crime.”                                      have been declining
                                                                              line of duty is rising
Sen Ted Cruz (R-TX), “US Senate Judiciary           for decades. Fewer
                                                                              fast.
Subcommittee Hearing: The War on                    police officers were
Police–How the Federal Government                   killer in 2015 than any
Undermines State and Local Law                      year since the 1890s.
Enforcement.” Washington DC, Tuesday
November 17, 2015.


                                                    In fact, according to
”Our taxes–we just put in a plan the other          the Organization for
day–we’re going to reduce taxes                     Economic
tremendously because we have the highest            Cooperation and
tax rate anywhere in the world and our              Development, taxes        U.S. tax rates are the
middle class is being absolutely destroyed.”        account for only about    highest in the world.
Donald Trump(R-NY), “Presidential                   25% of the US
Campaign Rally” Richmond,VA, Wednesday              economy–the second
October 14, 2015.                                   smallest share among
                                                    all advanced nations.

                Table 3: Study 1 Misstatements, Corrections, and Survey Items




                                                   iii
                                                                                                               iv




  A.2 Study 1 Linear Model Coefficients
                Discrim.     Gun           Most        Obama      Surge in      Undoc.     US taxes     Workers
                sole         Violence      prisoners   cuts       killings of   immi-      highest in   pay more
                cause        at all time   serving     defense    police        grants     world        tax than
                gender       high          drug        spending   officers      disprop.   (Trump)      hedge
                wage         (Clinton)     sentences   (Rubio)    (Cruz)        criminal                fund
                gap                        (Obama)                              (Trump)                 managers
                (Obama)                                                                                 (Clinton)
Intercept       3.5**        3.2**         3.9**       3.3**      3.0**         2.5**      2.7**        3.4**
                0.03         0.03          0.03        0.03       0.03          0.03       0.03         0.03
Correction      -0.5**       -0.9**        -1.0**      -1.1**     -0.9**        -0.4**     -0.4**       -0.8**
                0.04         0.04          0.04        0.04       0.04          0.04       0.04         0.04
Ideology        -27.8**      -18.7**       -16.3**     15.0**     24.3**        34.3**     23.3**       -15.5**
                1.65         1.63          1.47        1.51       1.47          1.49       1.70         1.61
Ideology 2      0.0          -0.6          -1.9        4.8*       -1.7*         3.0*       -3.6*        -1.1
                1.64         1.62          1.45        1.53       1.46          1.49       1.75         1.62
Ideology3       0.8          1.9           -2.0        1.9        1.8           0.2        2.5*         0.6
                1.63         1.62          1.45        1.53       1.46          1.48       1.74         1.61
Correction×     4.1*         9.7**         0.4         -0.2       -5.7*         -5.5*      -5.1*        0.3
Ideology        2.35         2.30          2.06        2.14       2.11          2.11       2.37         2.26
Correction×     -1.1         -3.5*         -2.1        -2.9       -0.5          -0.8       0.0          0.2
Ideology2       2.35         2.30          2.06        2.14       2.11          2.11       2.38         2.26
Correction×     -0.9         -1.3          2.8         -2.6       -2.6          0.3        -2.4         -1.1
Ideology3       2.35         2.30          2.06        2.14       2.11          2.11       2.38         2.26


n               3124         3124          3125        3125       3125          3125       3124         3126
Adj. R2         0.16         0.17          0.24        0.24       0.24          0.25       0.11         0.15
AIC             9863         9748          9062        9295       9194          9200       9927         9631

* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001,

  Table 4: Study 1 Linear Model Coefficients. Cell entries are beta coefficients with their standard error
  below.These models provide the predicted values in figure 1, on page 15.
A.3 Study 2 Misstatements (paired by partisanship), Corrections, and Survey Items

 Misstatement                                       Correction                 Survey Item

                     Bipartisan Misconception 1: President Obama passed TARP


 ”Barack Obama is owned by Wall Street. The         .                          .
 fat cats, as he calls them, they’re his friends.   .                          .
 They’re his pals. That’s where he gets his         In fact, the Wall Street   .
 campaign donations. And he’s very generous         bailout (known as          .
 about giving these cats their cat nip — bigger     TARP) was signed           .
 returns on their investments in bailouts.”         into law by President      .
 Gov Sarah Palin (R), ”Speech to GOP Donors”,       George W. Bush in          President Obama
 Lake Buena Vista, November 4, 2011.                October 2008, before       signed the Wall Street
                                                    President Obama took       bailouts into law.
                                                    office. While in office,
 “We got back every dime we used to rescue          President Obama
 the financial system, but we also passed a         oversaw the program’s
 historic law to end taxpayer-funded Wall           partial
 Street bailouts for good.”                         implementation.
 President Barack Obama (D), “Remarks by
 The President at a Campaign Even in Miami,
 FL”, October 11, 2012


 Bipartisan Misconception 2: President Obama accommodates illegal/undocumented immigrants


 “[As President] I will enforce the law. That       .                          .
 means you stop the Obama administration’s          .                          .
 policy of releasing criminal illegal aliens. Do    .                          .
 you know how many aliens Bill Clinton              .                          .
 deported? 12 million. Do you know how              .                          ..
 many illegal aliens, George W. Bush                In fact, according to      .
 deported? 10 million.”                             the Department of
 Senator Ted Cruz (R-TX), “CNN/Salem                Homeland Security,         President Obama has
 Radio GOP Presidential Candidate Debate”,          President Obama has        been more tolerant of
 Las Vegas NV, December 15, 2015.                   deported illegal           illegal immigration
                                                    immigrants at twice        than previous
                                                    the rate of his            Presidents.
                                                    predecessor, President
                                                    George W. Bush.

                                                      v
Misstatement                                    Correction                Survey Item



“[President Obama] said he will flex his
executive muscle, to be as big and as bold as
he can be, to reduce deportations of
undocumented immigrants, to keep families
together. Today, I saw our champion.”
Representative Luis Gutierrez (D-IL), “Rep
Gutierrez: Statement After Meeting With
President Obama on Immigration”,
Washington, DC, July 16, 2014.




                   Bipartisan Misconception 3: Teen pregnancy rate is spiraling


“In the black community, I think we have to     .                         .
be honest with ourselves. With what’s going     .                         .
on in Chicago and Detroit and New Orleans       .                         .
and Washington, D.C, where just tons of         .                         .
shootings, murder, violence, all the time,      .                         .
where we have tons of teenage pregnancy.        .
Women giving birth, it ends their education.    .                         .
It send their children into poverty. It         .                         .
continues the cycle of poverty and              In fact, according to     .
dependence.”                                    the Center for Disease    .
Dr Ben Carson (R-TN), “The Sean Hannity         Control, the              .
Show”, November 14, 2014.                       pregnancy rate among      .
                                                black teenagers           The pregnancy rate
                                                declined by 66%           among black teenagers
                                                between 1991 and          has increased over the
                                                2013. Among white         last thirty years.
                                                teenagers it has fallen
                                                by 50% during that
                                                period.




                                                  vi
Misstatement                                         Correction               Survey Item



“Comprehensive sex education programs are
successful at reducing behaviors that put
young people at risk. These programs also
reduce unintended pregnancy and the
transmissions of STIs, including HIV. The
United States still has the highest teen
pregnancy rate in the industrialized world,
and recent reports have shown that teen birth
rates are on the rise.”
Rep Barbara Lee (D-CA), “Congresswoman
Barbara Lee and Senator Frank Lautenburg
Introduce Bill to Expand Comprehensive Sex
Education”, February 21, 2013, Washington
DC



            Bipartisan Misconception 4: China holds the majority of US sovereign debt


“I’m going to look at every federal program          .                        .
and I’ll ask this question: “Is a program so         .                        .
critical it’s worth borrowing money from             .                        .
China to pay for it?” And if it doesn’t pass         .                        .
that test, I’m going to eliminate that               .                        .
program.”                                            .                        .
Gov Mitt Romney (R-MA), “Romney’s                    .In fact, according to   .
Litmus Test for federal programs: is it worth        the Treasury             .
a Chinese loan?” Foreign Policy, September           Department, China
24, 2012.                                            owns less than 12% of    Most US debt is
                                                     all US Debt. The         owned by China.
                                                     majority is held by
“The way [President George W. Bush] has              American banks and
done it over the last eight years is to take out a   investors
credit card from the Bank of China in the
name of our children, driving up our national
debt from $5 trillion... so that now we have
over $9 trillion. That’s irresponsible. That’s
unpatriotic.”
then Senator Barack Obama (D-IL),
“Campaign Rally”, Fargo, ND July 3, 2008.

                                                      vii
Misstatement                                     Correction               Survey Item



       Bipartisan Misconception 5: Whites will imminently be a racial minority in the US


”[The Republican Party] is losing the            .                        .
demographics race badly. We’re not               .                        .
generating enough angry white guys to stay       .                        .
in business for the long term.”                  In fact, according to    .
Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC), quoted in         the US Census Bureau,    .
The Washington Post, August 29, 2012             Whites will remain the   In the next few years,
                                                 majority in the US       whites will make up
                                                 until at least 2045.     less than half of the US
“This might be the last Presidential election    Whites still comprise    population.
during which Texas is not considered a swing     75% of the US federal
state. The sleeping giant of the Texas Latino    electorate.
vote is poised to awaken and alter the fate of
every future election.”
Eva Longoria (D–Chairwoman of President
Barack Obama’s reelection campaign)
”Sleeping Giant: Texas Latino Vote”, Politico,
October 31, 2012.



             Bipartisan Misconception 6: Chicago’s Gun Homicide Rate is Spiraling


“Nothing illustrates America’s breakdown         .                        .
like the way the President’s hometown,           .                        .
Chicago, celebrates its holidays. Memorial       .                        .
Day: 12 dead, 56 wounded. The Fourth of          .                        .
July: 10 dead, 53 wounded. Labor Day: 9          .                        .
dead, 46 wounded. This kind of third world       .                        .
carnage has become absolutely normal.”           In fact, the number of   .
NRA CEO Wayne LaPierre, “How to Stop             annual homicides in      .
Violent Crime”, NRA Advertisement, October       Chicago has decreased
27, 2015                                         by 50% since the early   Homicides in Chicago
                                                 1990s. In 2014,          are currently at an
                                                 Chicago had the          all-time high.
                                                 fewest annual
                                                 homicides since 1979.

                                                  viii
Misstatement                                        Correction                Survey Item



”It is true that in some cities, including here
in my hometown of Chicago, gun violence
and homicides have spiked– and in some
cases they’ve spiked significantly… Because
that’s real, we’ve got to get on top of it before
it becomes an accelerating trend. President
Barack Obama, “Speech to the 122nd
International Association of Chiefs of Police
Annual Conference”, October 27, 2015,
Chicago IL.


                         Bipartisan Misconception 7: Spiraling Abortion Rate


“On abortion, President Obama has chosen            .                         .
to pander to the most extreme elements of his       .                         .
party. In the Clinton years, the stated goal        .                         .
was to make abortion ’safe, legal and rare.’        .                         .
Now, apparently, Obama stands for an                .                         .
absolute, unqualified right to abortion–at any      .                         .
time, under any circumstances, and paid for         In fact, according to     .
by taxpayers.”                                      the Center for Disease    .
Representative Paul Ryan (R, WI), “Speech to        Control, the number
the 2012 Value Voters’ Summit”, Washington          of abortions has fallen   The number of
DC, September 12, 2012.                             by over 50% since the     abortions performed
                                                    early 1980s. In 2012,     in the US annually is
                                                    there were fewer          at an all-time high.
“I would like to reduce the number of               abortions than in any
unwanted pregnancies that result in women           year since 1973.
feeling compelled to get an abortion, or at
least considering getting an abortion,
particularly if we can reduce the number of
teen pregnancies, which has started to spike
up again.”
President Barack Obama “News Conference
by the President”, Washington DC, April 29,
2009.


                     Bipartisan Misconception 8: Obama Restricts Drone Strikes
                                                      ix
Misstatement                                      Correction               Survey Item



“At a time we need resolve the most, we’re        .
sounding retreat. Our enemies are                 .
emboldened all over the planet. Al Qaeda in       ..
Iraq is coming back with avengeance[sic].         .
[The President] shows this lack of resolve,       .
saying “this war is over.” At a time when our     .
homeland is under attack everyday, he’s           .
changed the standard of when we can go after      .
someone with a drone strike: the strike has to
have no chance of civilian casualties. We’re      According to an
diminishing our national security.                analysis of news
Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC), ”Fox News          reporting, President
Sunday”, May 26, 2013.                            Obama has ordered
                                                  ten times as many
                                                  drone attacks as his
”Any U.S. military action in foreign lands        predecessor, President
risks creating more enemies and impacts           George W.Bush.
public opinion overseas. Our laws constrain
the power of the President even during
wartime, and I have taken an oath to defend
the Constitution. The precision of drone
strikes and the secrecy can lead a President to
view drone strikes as a cure-all for terrorism.
For this reason, I’ve insisted on strong
oversight of all lethal action.” President
Barack Obama (D), ”Speech at National
Defense University”, Washington DC, May 23
2013.


                  Table 5: Study 2 Misstatements, Corrections, and Survey Items




                                                       x
    A.4 Study 2 Linear Model Coefficients
                                      Obama ac-
                 China                commodates                                                                            Spiraling                   Spiraling
                 holds                  undocu-                Obama                   Obama              Spiraling         Chicago                       teen                    Whites
               majority of               mented                passed                  restricts          abortion            gun                      pregnancy               imminently
                US debt                immigrants               TARP                 drones’ use            rate            violence                      rate                  a minority
                                  y                 z                                                 a                                                                                   ia       m
                     ma          e               re                ma                    ma         am        ma                  ma              re                       n           or
                              mn           t ier         uz                                       h                                            er                     so             g          aha
                  ba        o            u                      ba            lin     ba        ra          ba         an      ba         Pi              e         ar              n          r
                O          R           G              Cr       O         Pa          O         G           O        Ry       O          La              Le      C                La          G
Intercept      3.6*       3.4*        3.7*        3.8*        3.2*      3.2*        2.6*      2.5*        2.9*     2.7*     3.4*       3.6*            3.3*    3.4*            3.3*       3.3*
               0.04       0.04        0.04        0.04        0.04      0.04        0.04      0.04        0.04     0.04     0.04       0.04            0.04    0.04            0.04       0.04
Correction     -1.4*      -1.4*       -1.0*       -1.0*       -1.1*     -1.2*       -0.7*     -0.7*       -1.0*    -0.9*    -1.1*      -1.4*           -1.4*   -1.3*           -1.1*      -1.0*
               0.06       0.06        0.06        0.06        0.06      0.06        0.06      0.05        0.05     0.05     0.06       0.06            0.05    0.05            0.06       0.06
Ideology       0.6        7.4*        15.1*       7.5*        1.6       7.8*        6.8*      1.0         9.6*     18.5*    9.9*       1.4             12.8*   7.7*            2.7        2.9
               1.54       1.50        1.49        1.47        1.47      1.53        1.51      1.41        1.41     1.39     1.50       1.46            1.36    1.40            1.63       1.59
Ideology2      0.8        0.2         -0.7        2.5         0.5       0.6         1.9       -3.0*       0.3      0.7      -0.2       1.7             -2.2    1.6             1.5        3.1
               1.52       1.48        1.47        1.51        1.46      1.55        1.50      1.39        1.40     1.39     1.49       1.45            1.36    1.43            1.62       1.57
           3
Ideology       0.8        1.3         1.5         0.2         -1.4      0.1         0.3       0.8         -0.2     1.9      -0.2       -0.5            0.8     3.5*            0.7        -2.0
               1.51       1.49        1.46        1.50        1.46      1.53        1.48      1.38        1.41     1.39     1.50       1.47            1.37    1.41            1.63       1.57
Correction× 1.0           0.1         4.3*        -3.0        -2.7      2.1         -2.1      -2.4        -2.7     -8.5*    -0.1       2.3             -1.5    -1.1            2.8        -1.3
Ideology    2.21          2.14        2.09        2.11        2.08      2.18        2.08      1.96        2.00     2.00     2.15       2.07            1.99    1.99            2.27       2.23
Correction× -1.3          -0.5        2.7         -0.2        -2.3      -0.6        -2.9      -0.3        -1.2     0.4      4.8*       -1.2            5.1*    -0.5            1.1        -1.8
Ideology2   2.21          2.14        2.09        2.11        2.08      2.18        2.08      1.96        2.00     2.00     2.15       2.07            2.00    1.99            2.27       2.24
Correction× 1.9           -2.0        -5.5*       -0.7        1.7       0.3         -0.5      -0.5        1.4      -0.7     6.8*       2.8             1.2     -1.7            0.4        3.5
Ideology3   2.22          2.15        2.09        2.11        2.08      2.18        2.08      1.96        2.01     2.00     2.15       2.07            1.99    1.99            2.27       2.23

n              1405       1396        1405        1396        1400      1401        1405      1396        1384     1417     1406       1395            1404    1397            1401       1400
Adj.R2         0.29       0.33        0.31        0.21        0.23      0.25        0.12      0.12        0.22     0.28     0.26       0.32            0.38    0.33            0.20       0.16
AIC            4273       4161        4118        4112        4096      4221        4095      3914        3942     4021     4204       4069            3961    3963            4335       4271
 *p≤0.05.
    Table 6: Study 2 Linear Model Coefficients. Issues are listed in the top row, and the two speakers within issue in the next row. Cell entries are
    beta coefficients and their standard error below. These models provide the predicted values in figure 2 on page 18 .
A.5 Study 3 Mock Newspaper Article Treatments. Randomized corrections shaded.

A.5.1 Chicago Gun Violence (Obama Quote)

Bloody Weekend In Chicago–10 Killed, 53 Wounded in violent long weekend.
Chicago Daily News, July 5th 2015
By Laura McFarlane
. As the fourth of July holiday weekend drew to a close, communities, police and the Chicago
community were left counting the cost of the most deadly three day span in two years, during which
63 residents were wounded or killed.
. Community leaders were united in their call for a cessation of violence, and urged those who
had information about the weekend’s killings to contact the Chicago Police.
. Chicago’s violence topped headlines around the county. In remarks to a convention of the na-
tion’s police chiefs, President Barack Obama said “In my hometown of Chicago, gun violence and
homicides have spiked– and in some cases they’ve spiked significantly… Because that’s real, we’ve
got to get on top of it before it becomes an accelerating trend.”
. Police department records, however, show a steady decline in homicides since the early 1990s,
with 2014 having the fewest killings of any year since 1979.
. A police spokesman reported that the city had excellent leads in many of the killings, and promised
that the coming days would bring a slew of arrests.


A.5.2 Chicago Gun Violence (Wayne LaPierre Quote)

Bloody Weekend In Chicago–10 Killed, 53 Wounded in violent long weekend.
Chicago Daily News, July 5th 2015
By Laura McFarlane

. As the fourth of July holiday weekend drew to a close, communities, police and the Chicago
community were left counting the cost of the most deadly three day span in two years, during which
63 residents were wounded or killed.
. Community leaders were united in their call for a cessation of violence, and urged those who
had information about the weekend’s killings to contact the Chicago Police.
. Chicago’s violence topped headlines around the county. In remarks to a National Rifle Associa-
tion convention, NRA Spokesman Wayne LaPierre said, ”Nothing illustrates America’s breakdown
like the way the president’s hometown, Chicago, celebrates its holidays. The Fourth of July: 10 dead,
53 wounded. This kind of third world carnage has become absolutely normal.”
. Police department records, however, show a steady decline in homicides since the early 1990s,
with 2014 having the fewest killings of any year since 1979.
. A police spokesman reported that the city had excellent leads in many of the killings, and promised
that the coming days would bring a slew of arrests.




                                                xii
A.5.3 Donald Trump, Mexican immigrants, and crime

Donald Trump Announces Presidential Bid with Bombastic Promise to Restore Country’s Great-
ness
Atlanta Tribune, July 13th 2015
By Andrew J Charles

. Real Estate Mogul, reality TV star, and best-selling author Donald Trump announced his candi-
dacy for President in the Trump Tower in Midtown Manhattan today.
. In pursuing the GOP nomination, Trump pledged to defend America from its enemies and re-
store its greatness: “Our enemies are getting stronger and stronger by the day and we as a country
are getting weaker. I’m serious when I tell you I will make this country great again.”
. Trump was especially critical of those Mexicans who are in the United States illegally, saying:
“The US has become a dumping ground for everyone’s problems. When Mexico sends its people,
they’re not sending their best. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists.”
. However, according to a recent U.S. Census Bureau study, undocumented immigrants actually
commit crimes at a lower rate than the general population.
. Trump promised that he would govern unlike any traditional politician, dispensing with ”favors
for special interests” and instead focus on the needs of everyday Americans.


A.5.4 Spiraling Abortion Rate

Rep Ryan: I’ll Fix America’s Decline in Social Values
San Jose Herald, September 12th 2012
By Nicholas Katsiaficas

. The Republican Party’s nominee for Vice President, Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, laid
out the bold new path a Romney/Ryan White House would seek on social issues, while harshly crit-
icizing President Obama, in a speech in Washington, DC yesterday.
. Ryan claimed that the President Obama had backtracked on many long-standing and previously
bipartisan American commitments, such as robust support for Israel, opposition to an Iranian nu-
clear weapon, and commitment to the objective of full employment.
. Ryan’s most cutting criticism, met with enthusiastic applause, was made of the President’s changed
policy on abortion : “In the Clinton years, the stated goal was to make abortion ‘safe, legal and rare.’
Obama stands for an absolute, unqualified right to abortion–at any time, under any circumstances,
and paid for by taxpayers.”
. Statistics from the Center for Disease Control tell a different story. The number of abortions
steadily declined during President Obama’s first term, with fewer abortions in 2012 than any year
since 1973.
. Ryan closed by urging attendees to recognize the importance of this election, by promising that
America might be “forever changed” if the President was granted a second term in office.



                                                  xiii
A.5.5 Solar Power Employment

Clinton: Together, We’ll Remake Our Economy, Rebuild the Middle Class
Concord News, December 8, 2015
By Michelle Bardella

. In a public forum hosted by the Concord Monitor, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton,
a leading Democratic candidate for President, outlined a plan for the economic renewal of New
England. Clinton’s plans revolved around a combination of government spending and tax incen-
tives, designed to spur employment.
. Clinton emphasized the role government can play creating “Green” energy jobs—jobs in renew-
able energy sectors, such as solar power. Clinton observed that, following the Obama administra-
tion’s expansive commitment to solar subsidies, “We now have more jobs in solar than we do in oil!”
. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, however, about four times as many Americans are
employed in oil extraction than in solar power.
. Clinton promised that her commitment to spurring job growth in the region will last “long after
the clamor of the political season has died down.”
.


A.5.6 US Healthcare Costs

Sanders sees collapse in middle class, unacceptable inequality
Dayton Star, August 26, 2015
By Michael Calderone

. The Democratic candidate for President, Senator Bernie Sanders (Independent, Vermont), was
interviewed on NBC’s Meet The Press yesterday, and provided a clear description of his intended
economic program.
. Senator Sanders complained that despite a recovered economy, and the increasing prosperity
among those at the top of the economic ladder, the American middle class had never been more in
jeopardy.
. Sanders asserted that “we are the only major country on earth that doesn’t guarantee health care
to all people, [and] working class families are not finding it very, very difficult to send their kids to
college.”
. When pressed on the expense of his programs, Sanders resisted, pointing out that inclusive social
programs need not be more expensive: “I live 100 miles away from Canada: they guarantee health
care to all people. We spend almost twice as much per capita on our health care as do the people of
any other country.”
. Sanders’s claim flies in the face of data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and De-
velopment (OECD), which show that, in 2014, the US paid only 40% more per capita than Switzer-
land.
. When Sanders’ candidacy was first announced, there was some uncertainty about just what it
would mean to be a “socialist” Presidential candidate. Following Sunday’s interview, there is little
remaining doubt that Sanders intends a considerable expansion of the federal government.
                                                   xiv
A.5.7 Iraq WMD

News text
Wilkes-Barre, PA,
October 7, 2004 (AP)

. President Bush delivered a hard-hitting speech here today that made his strategy for the remain-
der of the campaign crystal clear: a rousing, no-retreat defense of the Iraq war.
. Bush maintained Wednesday that the war in Iraq was the right thing to do and that Iraq stood
out as a place where terrorists might get weapons of mass destruction.
. “There was a risk, a real risk, that Saddam Hussein would pass weapons or materials or informa-
tion to terrorist networks, and in the world after September the 11th, that was a risk we could not
afford to take,” Bush said.
. While Bush was making campaign stops in Pennsylvania, the Central Intelligence Agency re-
leased a report that concludes that Saddam Hussein did not possess stockpiles of illicit weapons at
the time of the U.S. invasion in March 2003, nor was any program to produce them under way at the
time. The report, authored by Charles Duelfer, who advises the director of central intelligence on
Iraqi weapons, says Saddam made a decision sometime in the 1990s to destroy known stockpiles of
chemical weapons. Duelfer also said that inspectors destroyed the nuclear program sometime after
1991.
. The President travels to Ohio tomorrow for more campaign stops.


A.8 Study 4 Mock Newspaper Article Treatments. Randomized corrections shaded.

The Abortion, WMD, and Solar Power treatments in Study 4 were identical to the mock articles

described in sections A.5.4, A.5.7, and A.5.5, respectively.


A.8.1 Fracking (Sanders)

Sanders: Secretary Clinton ignores fracking’s devastating cost
The Richmond Star, April 16, 2016
By Andrea Simpson

. In an op-ed published yesterday, Senator Bernie Sanders (VT), the underdog candidate for the
Democratic Presidential nomination, slammed his front-running opponent, Secretary Hillary Clin-
ton (NY), for ignoring the environmental devastation wrought by hydraulic fracturing of under-
ground minerals, a process commonly known as fracking.
. Fracking has undergone rapid growth in the US in the last decade, reducing energy prices and
providing new industries and jobs, especially in the region of the Midwest most hurt by the generations-
long decline in manufacturing.
. Writing yesterday, Sanders said this economic windfall had come at the cost of polluting Amer-
icans’ drinking water, and had dangerously impaired young people’s health,
                                                  xv
A.6 Study 3 Linear Model Coefficients
                Spiraling      Spiraling       More jobs in     Sprialing      Undoc         US h.care
                Chicago        Chicago gun     solar than oil   abortionrate   immigrants    twice as
                gunviolence    violence        (Clinton)        (Ryan)         disprop.      expensive
                (LaPierre)     (Obama)                                         criminal      other
                                                                               (Trump)       countries
                                                                                             (Sanders)
 Intercept      4.1**          4.2**           2.9**            3.1**          2.9**         3.6**
                0.07           0.07            0.05             0.04           0.05          0.06
 Correction     -1.0**         -1.0**          -0.8**           -0.6**         -0.5**        -0.2*
                0.10           0.10            0.07             0.06           0.07          0.08
 Ideology       1.9            0.5             -4.8*            12.1**         15.9**        -4.8*
                1.50           1.48            1.58             1.41           1.48          1.78
 Ideology2      0.4            2.0             -3.3*            0.0            1.7           2.1
                1.46           1.46            1.58             1.40           1.44          1.77
 Ideology3      1.6            -0.4            -2.7             1.6            1.6           1.2
                1.46           1.46            1.56             1.41           1.47          1.78
 Correction×    3.2            1.5             4.9*             -0.2           1.8           -0.6
 Ideology       2.14           2.14            2.31             1.99           2.09          2.49
 Correction×    0.1            -0.5            0.5              3.0            0.5           -0.4
 Ideology2      2.14           2.14            2.31             2.01           2.10          2.49
 Correction×    0.7            -0.9            2.2              -0.2           -1.5          -0.9
 Ideology3      2.15           2.14            2.32             2.01           2.10          2.49


 n              489            488             977              977            977           977
 Adj.R2         0.19           0.19            0.13             0.19           0.25          0.02
 AIC            1460           1457            3057             2766           2861          3202
 ***p≤0.001, **p≤0.01, *p≤0.05.

Table 7: Study 3 linear model coefficients. Issues are listed in the top row (with the associated speaker
provided in the parentheses.) Cell entries are beta coefficients with their associated standard error
below . These models provide the predicted effects depicted in figure 3 and the marginal effects
depicted in figure 4 on page 23 .
          A.7 Study 4 Linear Model Coefficients
                      Abortion                        Fracking                    Solar Power                Taxes (Trump)           Unemployment (Trump)           WMD (Bush)

                 mp          od        mp        mp        od         mp        mp       od        mp        mp       od        mp       mp       od       mp       mp      od        mp
              Si          M         Co        Si         M         Co        Si        M        Co        Si        M        Co        Si       M       Co        Si      M       Co
 Intercept  2.8*        2.9*      2.6*       4.1*        4*       3.7*     2.9*       2.8*     2.7*      2.7*      2.7*     2.6*     2.6*     2.4*     2.3*      2.4*     3*       4*
              0.1        0.1        0.1       0.1        0.1       0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1       0.1      0.1     0.1       0.1     0.1     0.1
 Ideology   11.7*      10.6*        11*     -5.7*      -5.6*     -7.5*      -2.4     -5.8*    -5.5*     13.3*     11.4*    9.6*      13.8*    9.2*     7.8*      9.3*    6.9*    -8.7*
              1.6        1.4        1.5       1.5        1.6       1.5       1.6       1.4      1.3       1.4       1.6      1.5       1.7      1.7     1.8       1.5     1.8     1.4
Ideology2     1.4        1.8       -1.2       -1.1       2.3      0.2       -2.6     -2.9*      0.2        -1      -0.9      3.1      -0.3     -0.2     1.4      -2.2    -0.4     -1.3
              1.6        1.4        1.5       1.4        1.6       1.6       1.6       1.4      1.3       1.4       1.7      1.6       1.7      1.6     1.9       1.5     1.9     1.4
Ideology3    -0.1          1       -2.7       -1.1       1.3      -1.5      -0.5      0.9      -0.5       -1.7      1.5      0.5      -0.3     -0.4      -2      -1.5     2.8     1.6
              1.6        1.4        1.5       1.4        1.5       1.5       1.6       1.4      1.4       1.4       1.7      1.6       1.6      1.7     1.8       1.5     1.8     1.4
Correction -0.5*       -0.8*      -0.7*     -0.7*      -0.6*     -0.4*     -0.7*     -0.9*    -0.8*     -0.2*     -0.4*    -0.4*     -0.3*    -0.3*    -0.2     -0.4*    -0.1     0.2
              0.1        0.1        0.1       0.1        0.1       0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1       0.1      0.1     0.1       0.1     0.1     0.1
Correction× -2.4         -1.3      0.8        3.2       -1.7      -0.5       1.3      4.7*     5.5*        0       -1.6      3.1      -2.7     0.9      2.1        0     0.6        3
Ideology      2.1         2         2.1       2.2        2.2       2.2       2.2       2.1      2.1        2        2.2      2.2       2.3      2.3     2.4       2.2     2.4     1.9
Correction×  -1.6       -5.1*      3.8       -2.8      -5.3*      -2.2       3.3       1.2     -4.1*     -0.6      0.6      -0.4       0.1      0.3    -0.9      0.9      0.4     0.8
Ideology2    2.2          2         2.1       2.3        2.2       2.2       2.2       2.1      2.1        2        2.2      2.2       2.3      2.3     2.4       2.2     2.4     1.9
Correction×  0.2         -1.2      2.6      4.6*        -0.3       0.1       0.1      -1.2      0.5       0.9      -0.3     -0.5       0.7      1.8     0.7      2.8     -2.5      -2
Ideology3    2.2          2         2.1       2.3        2.2       2.2       2.2       2.1       2         2        2.2      2.2       2.3      2.3     2.4       2.2     2.4     1.9

   n          450      436        446       438        448       446       444        444       444     449       448       435      448       442     442      439      446     447
 Adj.R2        0.2     0.28       0.27      0.13        0.11      0.11      0.1      0.18       0.17    0.29       0.2     0.22      0.21     0.15     0.11     0.16     0.07     0.11
  AIC         1337     1233       1292      1314       1359      1334      1338      1296       1275    1284      1348     1302      1412     1366     1413     1338     1429    1247
**p≤0.001, *p≤0.01, *p≤0.05.
          Table 8: Study linear model coefficients. Issues are listed in the top row (with the associated speaker provided in the parentheses.) Cell
          entries are beta coefficients with the associate standard error below. These models make up the correction effects depicted in figure 5 on
          page 27 .
. “The toxic chemicals used in fracking are known to cause lung cancer and birth defects. Both the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the National Academy of Sciences have shown clear
evidence that hydraulic fracturing can lead to a contaminated water supply. There is simply no good
way to contain the cocktail of toxic chemicals pumped into the ground,” Sanders wrote.
. In fact, the EPA’s position on fracking is not as Sanders described it. A recent EPA report on
fracking concluded: “We did not find evidence that these mechanisms have led to widespread, sys-
temic impacts on drinking water resources in the United States.”
. Sanders went on to claim that, by opting to support an expansion of fracking, Secretary Clinton
had demonstrated values inconsistent with the interests of the American people.


A.8.2 Abortion (Ryan)

Rep Ryan: I’ll Fix America’s Decline in Social Values
San Jose Herald, September 12th 2012
By Nicholas Katsiaficas

   The Republican Party’s nominee for Vice President, Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, laid
out the bold new path a Romney/Ryan White House would seek on social issues, while harshly
criticizing President Obama, in a speech in Washington, DC yesterday.
   Ryan claimed that the President Obama had backtracked on many long-standing and previously
bipartisan American commitments, such as robust support for Israel, opposition to an Iranian nu-
clear weapon, and commitment to the objective of full employment.
   Ryan’s most cutting criticism, met with enthusiastic applause, was made of the President’s changed
policy on abortion : “In the Clinton years, the stated goal was to make abortion ‘safe, legal and rare.’
Obama stands for an absolute, unqualified right to abortion–at any time, under any circumstances,
and paid for by taxpayers.”
   Statistics from the Center for Disease Control tell a different story. The number of abortions
steadily declined during President Obama’s first term, with fewer abortions in 2012 than any year
since 1973.
   Ryan closed by urging attendees to recognize the importance of this election, by promising that
America might be “forever changed” if the President was granted a second term in office.


A.8.3 Tax cuts (Trump)

Lower rates, fewer rules, more fairness–Trump says tax plan will be a ‘Rocket Ship’ for the econ-
omy
Leonard Andrew
Houston Morning News
September 28, 2015

   GOP Presidential frontrunner, businessman Donald Trump, today revealed his new tax plan by
promising to simplify the tax system, reduce tax rates, and eliminate loopholes, all while shrinking
the federal government’s deficit.
                                               xviii
   “It will be simple, it will be easy, it will be fair,” Trump said at a press conference,. He went on to
say that his plan “reduces or eliminates loopholes available to the special interests and the very rich.
In other words, it’s going to cost me a fortune.”
   Along with eliminating federal income taxes on those making less than $50,000, Trump proposes
to cut the business tax rate in half , reduce the capital gains tax rate, while still retaining popular
deductions like the credits for charitable deductions and mortgage interest.
   Trump promised these cuts would not increase the federal deficit, saying “my plan will grow the
American economy at a level we haven’t seen in decades. It will take off like a rocket” and generate
more revenue overall.
   This was quickly contradicted by the non-partisan Tax Policy Center. Even under the most opti-
mistic projections, Trump’s tax plan would add about $10 trillion to the federal deficit.
   With Trump’s increasing his lead over his primary rivals, his bold new tax plan is sure to be a key
topic of conversation in the coming candidate debate.


A.8.4 True Unemployment (Trump)

Trump: true unemployment rate 30-40 percent, or higher
Christina Conte
Bangor Sentinel
February 8, 2016

   Following his dramatic victory in yesterday’s New Hampshire primary, GOP presidential fron-
trunner, businessman Donald Trump, claimed that the American people were being badly mislead
aboutthe true state of the US economy.
   “I am going to be the greatest jobs president that God ever created–remember that!” Trump
instructed his supporters in Manchester on Tuesday evening, before seeking to distinguish himself
from the economic management of President Obama.
   Trump told his supporters: “Don’t believe those phony numbers when you hear 4.9 and 5 percent
unemployment. The number’s probably 28, 29, as high as 35. In fact, I even heard recently 42 percent.
Do you think we’d have gatherings like this if we had 5 percent unemployment?”
   Trump’s claim is plainly false. The Bureau of Labor Statistics has gathered survey data on unem-
ployment since the 1940s; there’s never been a single recorded instance of political interference. The
BLS estimates today’s unemployment rate to be 4.9%
   Trump’s campaign announced a new set of rallies planned for Nevada and South Carolina, as he
plans to build on his New Hampshire momentum.




                                                   xix
              WMD                        Abortion                   True Unemployment          Tax Cuts                 Solar Power               Fracking

              Following the invasion     The number of                                                                  More Americans are
                                                                    The true                   Trump’s tax plan                                   Fracking has caused
              of Iraq in 2003, US        abortions performed                                                            employed in solar
 1. Simple                                                          unemployment rate is       would reduce the                                   widespread pollution
              forces did not find        in the US annually is                                                          power than in oil
                                                                    greater than 30%.          federal deficit.                                   to the water supply.
              WMD.                       at an all-time high                                                            extraction.

              Since Saddam Hussein       While the incidence of                                                         While the US labor        While mining
                                                                    After removing the         While the US
              had the opportunity to     abortion is difficult to                                                       market is vast and        companies may have
                                                                    effects of politicians     economy is large and
              conceal and destroy        estimate because of                                                            constantly changing,      tried to limit the
                                                                    interfering with the       difficult to analyze,
2. Moderate   weapons in the leadup      privacy issues, the                                                            more Americans are        damage, fracking has
                                                                    data, the true             Trump’s tax plan
              to the invasion in         number of abortions                                                            employed in solar         caused widespread
                                                                    unemployment rate is       would reduce the
              2003, US forces did        in the US annually is                                                          power than in oil         pollution to the water
                                                                    greater than 30%.          federal deficit.
              not find WMD.              at an all-time high..                                                          extraction.               supply

                                                                                               Even with the size and
              Immediately before                                                               complexity of the US     While the US labor
                                         While the incidence of     The unemployment
              the U.S. invasion, Iraq                                                          economy, the             market is vast and        While mining
                                         abortion is difficult to   rate has important
              had an active weapons                                                            uncertainty              constantly changing,      companies may have
                                         estimate because of        political ramifications,
              of mass destruction                                                              surrounding              and the energy sector’s   tried to limit the
                                         privacy issues, and        and government
              program, the ability to                                                          economic projections,    use of temporary          damage, weak
                                         also because of the        statisticians are
              produce these                                                                    and the inherent bias    employees makes           oversight from the
                                         threat that these          susceptible to threats
3. Complex    weapons, and large                                                               in evaluating a          measuring their           federal government
                                         numbers were               and influence. After
              stockpiles of WMD,                                                               political candidate’s    workforce more            and the vast amounts
                                         changed for political      removing the effects of
              but Saddam Hussein                                                               policies, Trump’s tax    difficult, more           of chemicals used in
                                         reasons, the number        politicians interfering
              was able to hide or                                                              plan should spur         Americans are             fracking has caused
                                         of abortions in the US     with the data, the true
              destroy these weapons                                                            growth and               employed in solar         widespread pollution
                                         annually is at an          unemployment rate is
              right before U.S. forces                                                         investment, and          power than in oil         to the water supply.
                                         all-time high.             greater than 30%.
              arrived.                                                                         ultimately reduce the    extraction.
                                                                                               federal deficit.

                               Table 9: Study 4 survey items. Each column corresponds to a mock article presented in section A.8
A.9 Study 4: Treatment Items ordered by complexity and issue

A.10 Pre and Post Weighted distribution of respondent characteristics, by study

A.11 Is factual adherence principally a function of partisanship or ideology?

As a final robustness check, we estimate every issue model again, alternating partisanship and ideol-
ogy as the predictive covariate (with the same functional form as equation 1 on 13 .) Reflecting their
importance to American political behavior, a voluminous literature has shown partisanship and
ideology to be related but distinct contours of mass attitudes. Partisanship reflects voters’ identity
commitments to a political party, serving as a specialized case of group affect. This group identity

assures voters that their copartisan candidates for office will eventually voter consistent with their

interests, even absent candidate-specific information. Ideology is the mass understanding of the po-
litical space in which these parties, individuals, and all other political actors find themselves. Among

the highly educated, ideological ordering is stable and clear. To the less well educated, ideological

space appears an inchoate clump, and respondent struggle to make use of this dimension (Wood &

Oliver, 2012).

      Accordingly, ideology and partisanship each have the potential to cause informational back-
fire. An ideologue might seek to redress their displeasure at receiving facts inconsistent with their

ideological principles–and in devising a counter argument, make themselves more convinced in

their original position. A partisan might similarly seek to protect a co-partisan political speaker, or

grow frustrated when exposed to information they perceive as discordant with their party’s electoral
interests.
      We therefore separately estimate the size of correction effects as a function of ideology and
partisanship (leaving us with two separate linear models for each issue, one for each predictor type.)
Figure 9 show the size of these marginal effects, with any point under the dashed horizontal indi-
cating factual updating consistent with the correction. Solid points indicate ideological updating–
hollow points partisan updating. These effect sizes are almost unerringly similar–only among the
most conservative respondents are there any significant differences, with Republicans and Conser-
                                                  xxi
vatives alternating between being more factually responsive on certain issues. While we principally

use ideology to be consistent with Nyhan and Reifler, our respondents’ consistent adherence to fac-
tual correction is not contingent on either choice.




                                                 xxii
                                                                                                   xxiii



                                                   Unweighted        Weighted
                                                          Study Wave                       Population
   Characteristic   Value                    1     2   3    4      1  2     3 4            . Target
                    1. 18-24                15   16 15 14         15 14 15 16                   13
                    2. 25-44               68    68 69 69        48 46 50 44                   35
   Age
                    3. 45-64               16     15 15 16        29 30 28 28                  35
                    4. 65-                   2     2   2    1      8 10    8 12                 17
                    1. HSD or Less         10    10     13    12    13    9     12   12       12
   Education        2. Some College        38    37    39    39    47    50    47    51       56
                    3. BA+                 51    53    48    49    40    41    40    36       32
                    1. White               78    79    77    78    69    67    67    67       64
                    2. Black                7     7     6     7      8   10    10    10       12
   Race
                    3. Hispanic             6     5     6     7     13   14    12    14       16
                    4. Other                9     9     11    8    10     9     11    9        8
                    1. Male                52    52    58    54    51    51    55    55       48
   Gender
                    2. Female              48    48    42    46    49    49    45    45       52
                    1. Working Full Time   55    77    63    72    70    70    68    70       72
                    2. Working Part-time   18     0    21     6    19     0    20    20       16
   Employment
                    3. Unemployed          14    10     9    10     6    10     5     5        5
                    4. Retired/Other       12    13     6     11    5    20     9     4        8
                    1. Democrats           51    50    52    50    46    47    46    46       47
   Partisanship     2. Independents        25    26    24    28    19    17    20    18       14
                    3. Republicans         24    24    24    22    34    35    34    36       39
                    1. Liberal             54    54    57    13    36    36    38    38       24
   Ideology         2. Moderate            21    22    20    16    29    28     31    31      32
                    3. Conservative        24    24    23    45    35    37     31    31      36
                    1. Protestant           6     13     4   20    29    35    27    27       47
                    2. Catholic            12    15     12    17   20    21    21    21       21
   Religion         3. Mormon              15      1   14    28     6     2     6    10       2
                    4. Atheist             45    44    48    22     31   29    32    28       23
                    5. Other               22    26    22     17   14    14    14    14       8
                    1. $1-$20k             16    15    20    12    28    30    32    32       36
                    2. $20-$40             28    26    28    20    27    25    29    29       26
                    3. $40-$40             22    21    22    25    19    18    16    16       15
   Income
                    4. $60-$80              17   18    16    15    12     11   12    12        9
                    5. $80-$100              7     7    6     8     6     5     4     4        4
                    6. $100k+               11    13    8    10     8     11    8     8        9

Table 10: Effect of providing rake weights for MTurk sample to population margins. The target distri-
bution is listed in bold in the rightmost column.
                                                                                                            xxiv




    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                    ●   ●       ●                           ●
                        ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●           ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                        ●                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                    ●   ●           ●   ●
                                                        ●
    ●   ●   ●               ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                ●   ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                ●                           ●       ●   ●                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                        ●                           ●




                                                        ●
                                                        ●
                                                    ●                       ●       ●   ●
                                                                                        ●   ●
    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                        ●   ●
                                            ●   ●                   ●   ●
                                                                        ●   ●                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                            ●   ●
                                ●                           ●   ●                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                    ●




                            ●
                        ●   ●                                               ●       ●   ●
        ●   ●   ●
                ●   ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●           ●               ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
    ●   ●           ●                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●                       ●
    ●




    ●   ●                                       ●               ●
        ●   ●   ●   ●                       ●
                                            ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●                                   ●   ●   ●
                    ●   ●   ●   ●
                                ●   ●
                                    ●   ●               ●                   ●
                                                                            ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                        ●   ●                                                       ●       ●




                                                                                        ●
    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●                   ●   ●   ●               ●                       ●
        ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●       ●       ●
                                                                                            ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                        ●   ●




    ●   ●   ●
            ●   ●       ●   ●                               ●                           ●
                                                                                        ●                           ●
                    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                ●

                                                                                ●

    ●   ●   ●
            ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                    ●   ●




Figure 9: Comparing the effect of ideology and partisanship on corrections effects. Hollow points
show the effect of corrections when modeled using partisanship, solid when modeled using ideology.
The number in the facet label indicates study in which a particular issue was tested.
